The V&A Waterfront, in the Western Cape, has become the first African company of its size and magnitude to achieve diamond-class status under the Heritage Environmental Management classification, it said in a statement on Tuesday. The V&A Waterfront’s journey with Heritage Environmental Management began in 2012 with a silver classification. After establishing a sustainability committee, the waterfront soon rose to gold and then platinum classification. To achieve platinum class, businesses must have a fully integrated environmental management system in place, and must score a minimum of 94% on their yearly environmental sustainability audits. To proceed to diamond classification, the waterfront had to demonstrate a continued socially responsible commitment towards environmental practices and community involvement. Another condition was that the waterfront should consistently attain platinum status for a minimum of five years, which it has now accomplished. Commenting on the achievement, V&A Waterfront CEO David Green said the “the V&A has a duty to raise the bar on environmental sustainability” and that the diamond-status was driven by its sustainability and corporate social investment (CSI) committees, as well as its tenants. In awarding diamond classification, the Heritage Management Company of South Africa operational director Neal Dickinson said the “the waterfront has a great commitment and approach towards sustainability and has integrated sustainability into their business strategy”. He added that the Heritage Management Company believes the efforts made by the waterfront, especially in the CSI and placemaking fields, “represents an industry benchmark and should be recognised as such”. For its September 2019 yearly Heritage Environmental Sustainability audit, the V&A Waterfront achieved an overall score of 96%. The audit assessed various categories, including those of purchasing and procurement, internal environmental sustainability systems and procedures, design and construction, transport and biodiversity management as well as training, awareness and competency, besides others.