From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: In unveiling Steyn City’s Vision 2020 guideline last month, Steyn City Properties revealed that it continues to invest in its luxury lifestyle estate development as it nears completion. With the most recent investment totaling R5.5-billion, Simone Liedtke gives us some insights into what residents can expect. Simone Liedtke: With Steyn City’s flagship development nearing completion, CEO Giuseppe Plumari tells Engineering News Online that its most recent investment is a representation of the company delivering on its promise to deliver the best lifestyle estate in South Africa. Steyn City Properties CEO Giuseppe Plumari: Simone Liedtke: As Plumari elaborates on when the development will be completed, he noted during a presentation last month that the estate will be able to accommodate up to 5 000 people. They will be able to enjoy 45 km of promenade to run, walk or cycle. Steyn City, which was built on a super basement capable of accommodating 2 000 vehicles, also features its own schools, its own filling station, a 300 m lagoon, heliport and even an equestrian centre. Steyn City Properties CEO Giuseppe Plumari: Simone Liedtke: Steyn City boasts 700 apartments and 11 penthouses and is now ready to break ground on its second commercial building, which offers over 5 000 m2 spread across ground, first and second storeys as well as roof level, with 315 parking bays. 2019 also saw the introduction of Steyn City’s 104 on Creek apartments, which is an option for people seeking the convenience of a “lock up and go” lifestyle. The development’s City Centre is nearing completion, and the first 220 housing units – comprising Phase 1 of the lifestyle development – are ready to be launched next year. Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.