South African and Irish companies have announced major deals, as part of an Irish trade delegation programme organised by Ireland’s trade and innovation agency, Enterprise Ireland. More than 40 Irish companies are participating in the trade mission, led by the Irish Minister for Business, Enterprise and Innovation. The mission aims to boost Irish business presence in South Africa and further collaboration between South African and Irish companies, particularly in key growth areas such as fintech, digital technologies, life sciences, construction and agri-engineering. The major new partnership deals being announced include Combilift celebrating €3-million worth of exports to South Africa and Africa at Nando’s Warehouse. Combilift is a considerable exporter of materials handling equipment to South Africa. To mark exports of over €3-million a year, Combilift will host an event at Nando’s Warehouse in Johannesburg, during which the South African company will take delivery of their new Combilift Aisle Masters. South African restaurant chain Nando's, founded in Johannesburg in 1987, operates over 1 000 outlets in 35 countries, including Ireland. “Nandos Warehouse selected the Combilift Aisle Master due to its ability to increase storage capacity and reduce their overall operational costs. By selecting Aisle Master Nando’s were able to achieve 23% more storage over a conventional reach truck,” commented Combilift South Africa product manager Andrew Maxwell. He added that the Aisle Master articulated forklift is capable of working in aisles as narrow as 1.6 m, lift heights of up to 15 m and has a lifting capacity of up to 3 t. Further, Irish clean air products company Novaerus has entered into a distribution partnership with Right ePharmacy. Novaerus’ patented clean air technology reduces the spread of airborne infections making healthcare facilities safer for patients and healthcare workers. The partnership with Right ePharma is expected to drive the uptake and use of Novaerus technology in South African healthcare facilities with the intention of addressing and reducing airborne diseases such as tuberculosis. The partnership will introduce Novaerus portable air disinfection units to healthcare facilities in Southern Africa. Meanwhile, Irish companies Delmec and IP Telecom are expanding into South Africa with new offices. Irish engineering company Delmec, which supplies the telecommunication industry worldwide, has announced that it will open its first office in South Africa in January 2020 to provide advanced telecom solutions to the South African market. IP Telecom South Africa, a subsidiary of IP Telecom Ireland, on Monday also officially announced the opening of its first offices in Cape Town in February 2020. IP Telecom South Africa will deliver voice over internet protocol services including Sip Trunking and Hosted PBX services with integrations into Microsoft 365 in the cloud that IP Telecom Ireland has delivered since 2010. The route to market for IP Telecom South Africa is 100% business-to-business partner via partner channels, offering co-branded reseller, white-label and wholesale models to potential channel partners in South Africa, thus replicating the success of the Irish channel model. Welcoming the new deals and partnerships between South African and Irish companies, Irish Minister for Business, Enterprise and Innovation Heather Humphreys said: “I am delighted to be in South Africa for this important trade mission to strengthen trade ties between South Africa and Ireland. “South Africa is a thriving and technologically advanced economy and there are great partnership opportunities for South African and Irish companies, which is very much reflected in the significant deals announced today.”