Mpumalanga Premier Refilwe Mtsweni-Tsipane has congratulated the University of Mpumalanga, which was established in 2014, for being included in the Presidency's '25 Year Review' report. “The University of Mpumalanga stands out as one of the beacons of the achievements of the 25 years of democratic dispensation and also serves as a promise for future development," the Premier said during a ceremony earlier this month. She noted that the government was committed to education, stating that African National Congress- (ANC-) led government was committed "to opening the doors of education to the great majority of the previously disadvantaged". Mtsweni-Tsipane said the ANC-led government had "reconstructed a dilapidated South Africa". “In 1994, the ANC-led government had inherited a fragmented State which was on the verge of collapse. What has unfolded in the 25 years of our nascent democracy is the purpose of why we are here today." She mentioned that the '25 Year Review' report was proof of the good and the bad that has happened since 1994. “This report is an in-depth analysis of our successes and failures as government since the advent of our democracy. What gives us comfort is that in just 25 short years, our democracy has become a beacon of a peaceful democratic transition across the world. That is no small feat,” said the Premier. She also acknowledged the struggles Mpumalanga and the country as a whole still faces. “Yes, like any other functional democracy we have challenges that we must address as a nation. The creation of a sustainable State is not impossible; it will require all provinces to work in a coordinated manner to ensure that we deliver on the national mandate. It will be tough but not insurmountable because we are the thuma mina generation. “Therefore, we all need to take collective responsibility to ensure that we reflect on the lessons outlined in the report and use those lessons to better equip ourselves in ensuring that we expedite the delivery of basic services and the overall improvement in the quality of life for our people,” she said.