From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Emerging natural gas producer Renergen’s Virginia gas project, in the Free State, has the potential to position South Africa as a prominent player in the helium market, making it the eighth country in the world to export helium. Simone Liedtke chats to Renergen about what the project is all about. Simone Liedtke: Renergen’s Virginia project also marks the construction of South Africa’s first commercial liquefied natural gas (LNG) liquefier and will result in the dual-listed company starting commercial production of both LNG, and liquid helium, by 2021. Stefani Marani, who heads Renergen, gives us a few reasons on why this project is so significant. Renergen CEO Stefano Marani: Simone Liedtke: The project also has the potential to become a part of South Africa’s gas future, which, naturally, could influence energy and fuel consumption, but it may not be the silver bullet we’re all looking for. Renergen CEO Stefano Marani: Simone Liedtke: Say the project has everything Renergen believes it has… What could this mean for not just the company, but the country as a whole? While speaking to Marani, it appears as though project may just be the embodiment of the “don’t judge a book by its cover” phrase. Renergen CEO Stefano Marani: Simone Liedtke: Turning towards the global helium shortage – which not many people seem to know about, Marani gives us some insight into what exactly this means and whether South Africa could, thanks to Renergen, become a prominent player in this critical market. Renergen CEO Stefano Marani: Simone Liedtke: The Virginia project is not the only thing that keeps Renergen busy, considering that the company launched its second CNG filling station, in Johannesburg, last month. The station will supply CNG to logistics company Black Knight’s converted fleet. Renergen CEO Stefano Marani: Simone Liedtke: The groundbreaking event for Renergen’s Virginia project is set to take place later this month. Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.