KwaZulu-Natal Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube has praised the Dube TradePort Special Economic Zone (SEZ) after the entity received the United Nations (UN) Investment Promotion Award, in Geneva recently. From about 29 SEZ entries across the world, Dube TradePort was singled out by the UN Conference on Trade and Development for doing exceedingly well in promoting sustainable investment in KwaZulu-Natal and South Africa. Dube-Ncube explained that, in 2003, Cabinet decided to relocate the old Durban International Airport to La Mercy, and to establish the Dube TradePort, which would incorporate the new King Shaka International Airport. Importantly, one of the key strategic reasons for the relocation was to establish an integrated multimodal logistics platform that would link the national road and rail systems to the seaports of Durban and Richards Bay, with the added value of air infrastructure to accommodate intercontinental widebody aircraft. “The wider context and long-term strategic objective of the Dube TradePort project was the establishment of an aerotropolis in the north of Durban, stretching from Umhlanga to Ballito. “Critically, the basis of the decision to relocate the airport was research which revealed that airports had a potential to shape business location and urban development in the twenty-first century, just as highways did in the twentieth century.” The MEC added that, in March 2012, South Africa’s national and provincial leaders officially opened a building housing the Dube TradePort. “When we officially opened this facility, we announced developments including a road link that would provide additional access from the Cargo Terminal and Trade Zone to the N2 and R102 highways and also open up new property development opportunities in the area.” She noted that government’s investments in transport infrastructure had been aimed at the improvement of the movement of goods and economic integration through a Durban–Free State–Gauteng logistics and industrial corridor. “We made a bold decision to connect the major economic centres of Johannesburg, Durban and Richards Bay and, simultaneously, connect these centres with improved export capacity through our sea-ports and Air Cargo facility. “By and large, through the intervening years, we have seen the construction and completion of the Cargo Terminal, Trade House - 29 South, Dube Square, Trade Zone and Dube City infrastructure, AgriZone. We are also steaming ahead with the establishment of the cutting edge technology at the Dube TradePort as inspired by the Fourth Industrial Revolution.” Dube-Ncube said 43 588 t of international cargo had passed though the Dube Cargo Terminal between April 2015 and December 2018. During the construction work at the Dube TradePort, about 4 117 direct temporary jobs were created, with 21 330 indirect jobs also created for local communities. “We are excited about Dube TradePort attracting an investment of more than R12-billion. As we move towards the construction of an aerotropolis, we have strengthened the coordination with all spheres of government and neighbouring provinces. This will ensure seamless construction and completion of this strategic national asset which will benefit the whole nation and future generations. “Having this greenfield site surrounded by a largely undeveloped area has created many opportunities for this democratic government, the private sector and social partners. The second phase of the Dube TradePort will provide 45 ha of prime industrial land which will generate more than R18-billion between now and 2024.”