Durban-based electronics manufacturing company Conlog has invested R110-million in a smart electricity meter manufacturing plant in the Dube TradePort Special Economic Zone (SEZ). The 12 000 m2 development, located at the now fully-subscribed Dube TradeZone 1, is a significant expansion of Conlog’s operation which was previously located in Overport, Durban. A member of JSE-listed Consolidated Infrastructure Group, Conlog is one of the world’s largest installers of prepaid electricity systems, with a footprint spanning four continents and 20 countries. The official opening of the new Conlog head office and manufacturing plant earlier this week was officiated by KwaZulu-Natal Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube. Trade and Industry Minister Ebrahim Patel commended Conlog on its investment in the SEZ, saying the facility would create a centre of manufacturing excellence in South Africa. The installation of two new automated surface mount assembly lines at the factory will increase the plant’s capacity to produce up to 550 000 units a month of electronic circuit boards, compared with the current 150 000 units a month. The circuit boards used in Conlog’s prepaid meters are also designed in Durban and the manufacture of the prepaid meters and vending systems for revenue management, all maintenance, after-sales support and training, are located at the Dube TradePort plant. The company currently employs 263 employees and plans to add a further 100 jobs over the next five years. “Our new facility will allow us to improve our product and service offering to our growing local and international customer base. Our decision to relocate to the Dube TradePort SEZ was cemented by the attractive incentives available by being located within the SEZ and within a controlled customs area precinct. “Currently, 80% of our production is for export. The location of Dube TradeZone 1, adjacent to the Dube Cargo Terminal, also improves access for growing our exports into Africa, South America, South-East Asia and other target markets,” comments Conlog CEO Logan Moodley. Dube-Ncube, meanwhile, highlighted that the Conlog plant sourced about 70% of its production inputs from local suppliers. “These are key objectives of South Africa’s Industrial Policy Action Plan and certainly bodes well for stimulating socioeconomic development,” Dube-Ncube said at the launch.