A range of video security solutions, including body-worn cameras and an artificial intelligence- (AI-) powered video platform, is starting to shape the way crime is tackled and scrutinised. The roll-out of secure, robust cameras worn by police, prison services officials, security teams and emergency services personnel globally, has flowed from a growing demand for video security solutions in markets worldwide. The cameras were displayed at the AfriCom 2019 exhibition, in Cape Town, this week. The new video solutions include a portfolio of body-worn cameras from Motorola Solutions’ recently acquired Scottish subsidiary Edesix. Motorola Solutions has also released new Avigilon video control centre software, which uses AI to simplify and streamline work for control room operators. “Video is a natural and paramount extension of our mission-critical communications platform. By harnessing the combined power of video, advanced software and AI, public safety agencies can make their operations substantially more efficient and increase security for citizens,” Motorola Solutions VP for Middle East and Africa Phil Jefferson said during a media briefing. He noted that body-worn cameras played an important role when it came to public safety. They have been shown to deter aggression and protect those working on the front line. They also can provide secure evidence to aid in court proceedings. Jefferson said the cameras operated by public safety officers are able to record, store, review and manage their evidence. According to IHS Markit's 'Body-Worn Cameras & Digital Evidence Management 2018 Report', the global installed base for law enforcement and police body-worn cameras alone will “increase by nearly 30% in 2018, exceeding 1.5-million body-worn cameras in use worldwide.” The latest product from Motorola Solutions is the Video Badge VB-400, which delivers high-definition recording capabilities to capture evidence-quality footage, Bluetooth sensor monitoring and built-in Global Positioning System functionality. Jefferson said body-worn video could save time for both police and civilians, as high-quality video evidence could lead to a significant reduction in the number of officers and civilians having to attend court. A survey among Edesix customers using body-worn cameras found that over 90% of criminal cases where these devices were involved resulted in early guilty pleas prior to trial, saving valuable time and resources. The latest Avigilon Control Center (ACC) 7 video management software introduces Focus of Attention, a cutting-edge user interface for live video monitoring. Rather than watching static video feeds, Focus of Attention uses AI-powered Avigilon self-learning video analytics and Unusual Motion Detection technologies to determine what information is important and should be presented to security operators. By providing information immediately to users, the system is designed to help ensure that critical events do not go unnoticed. The company is deploying real-time intelligence and real-time analytics for operators in control rooms. Through AI, cameras are able to detect and flag unusual motion in a street or stadium, for example. Cameras are also able to differentiate between different objects, vehicles and people. Motorola executives explained that through AI, a camera is able to detect the difference between a man and a woman, whether someone is old or young, and the colour of clothes they are wearing. Through this, they could help to find a missing child in a shopping centre or assist in tracking down a suspect in a crime. Jefferson said Motorola Solutions would continue to invest heavily in innovation in new technology, as well as maintaining and growing its Land Mobile Radio, which was its core radio technology. Motorola Solutions Sub-Saharan Africa and United Nations senior sales director Uwe Niske said he was confident that the newly expanded video security portfolio, which had been well received across the globe, could help further promote security for countries like South Africa. He said the City of Cape Town had shown great interest in its products and solutions.