A task chair with an automatic tilt and suspension armrest was unveiled in Italy last year and is now available for order worldwide. As more organisations move towards the concept of shared workplaces and work points, the manufacturer identified a growing demand for a chair that adapts to the needs of individual users. Tilt Technology
The chair uses a technology called the Auto-Harmonic Tilt which is a so-called hidden engine, situated in the gearbox beneath the seat.  The technology is designed to give the user a feeling of balance and comfort. It claims to provide continuous support and fluid movement corresponding to the person’s body, posture and seated position. In addition, the mechanism is designed to be able to detect the amount of tension required, based on the downward force exerted by the user. The manufacturer claims that the chair is able to provide the same experience for every user, regardless of body type or seated position. 3D-printing
According to the product designers, the development of the tilt mechanism involved building and testing full-scale prototypes, built with the use of in-house three-dimensional (3D) printing technology that blends aluminium dust and resin to create mechanically-sound components. These 3D printed prototypes were tested and repeatedly adapted, in order to achieve the final design of the chair. Suspension Material
The frame and fabric suspension material is said to work in tandem with the Auto-Harmonic Tilt technology. The continuous suspension material, called Intercept, is designed to form to each person’s contours and is aimed at delivering dynamic, uninterrupted support with thermal comfort.  The suspension material attaches to the frame of the chair, creating areas of high- and low-tension. Leaf Arms
The chair arms consist of suspension material stretched over a solid form, to create so-called Leaf Arms. The arm design is aimed at supporting the user’s elbow in a variety of positions and to prevent the arms from colliding with work surfaces. The chair is also available with fixed and height-adjustable arms, or without arms. Back Height
The chair is available in three different back heights, including a low back, mid back and high-back version and as a stool. Colour
The chair is available in six colour shades created to match the metals, plastics and fabrics. The Herman Miller Cosm chair was designed by Berlin-based Studio 7.5. This article was first published by Creamer Media's Product Portal, to advertise on the Product Portal please email advertising@creamermedia.co.za and to subscribe to receive the Product Portal's weekly email newsletter please email subscriptions@creamermedia.co.za.