The Dubai Chamber of Commerce and Industry (Dubai Chamber) will host the fifth edition of the Global Business Forum (GBF) on Africa on November 18 and 19, in Dubai. Organised under the theme “Scale Up Africa”, GBF on Africa 2019 will bring together African and United Arab Emirates (UAE) government and business leaders to explore avenues of economic cooperation and facilitate bilateral trade and investment flows. The high level forum will place a key focus on forging the connections that will enable scale-up and explore how public and private sector players in Africa and the UAE can work together to establish sustainable partnerships. “Over the years, the GBF on Africa has established itself as one of the world’s leading platforms that fosters cooperation between Africa and the UAE and positions Dubai as a global gateway for African companies,” says Dubai Chamber president and CEO Hamad Buamim. “The forum offers an unrivalled opportunity for key decision-makers to explore investment opportunities in Africa and forge new partnerships that pave the way for mutual benefits and economic growth,” he adds. He indicates that this year’s theme will highlight the importance of sustainable development as an engine and catalyst for economic and social progress in Africa and will also set the tone for constructive dialogue about key trends that are driving the continent’s next phase of growth. Buamim notes that the GBF on Africa supports Dubai Chamber’s international strategy and ongoing expansion efforts in Africa, where the organisation currently operates four representative offices in Ethiopia, Ghana, Mozambique and Kenya. He adds that the upcoming forum will offer valuable insights on business potential in promising African markets that have yet to be fully explored. Standard Bank and Invest Africa are supporting the upcoming forum as event partners. Among the key topics to be discussed by delegates at the forum are the roles of public-private cooperation and start-ups in driving economic growth and the key challenges and opportunities that are emerging across the continent. The fifth GBF on Africa is part of Dubai Chamber’s GBF series which focuses on emerging markets across Africa, Latin America and the Commonwealth of Independent States. Over the last four editions of the GBF on Africa, the forum has welcomed 20 heads of State and 95 Ministers and government officials from the African continent, as well as 6 300 business leaders, executives and decision-makers from 65 countries.