The Datsun Go is the cheapest passenger car to service and repair in South Africa, according to the 2019 Automobile Association (AA)-Kinsey Report on vehicle parts, servicing and repair costs, compiled by Malcolm Kinsey. The report does not cover 100% of the market, but does include the more popular models, with 72 vehicles included in this year’s survey. Kinsey notes that there has been a sharp surge in parts pricing since 2017, when the last report appeared. “An entry-level Datsun Go, for example, had a total parts basket of R44 372 in 2017. This year it is R63 310 – an almost 43% increase. “Similarly, the Volvo S60 had a parts basket price of R159 862 in 2017. The current price is R214 362 – a 34% increase.” Here are some of the category winners: For city cars and entry-level vehicles the Datsun Go is the overall winner of this category with a combined parts basket total of R63 310, followed by the Renault Kwid and the Ford Figo in second and third places. The order is the same for repair costs. Best servicing cost price goes to the Datsun, followed by the Honda Brio and the Suzuki Swift. Toyota gets its first mention in the crash parts section in a close contest, with the Etios pipping the Figo and the Go to the post. In the super mini category Renault Sandero owners will be pleased to know that their car heads the list of having the most affordable parts basket. The Toyota Yaris is second, with the Ford Fiesta third. The Nissan Micra heads the servicing section, followed by the Renaults – the Clio and the Sandero. Repairing the Micra is the cheapest in this category, with the Volkswagen Polo second and the Sandero third. The Sandero is the least expensive for crash parts, with the Fiesta squeezing out the Yaris for second place. In the crossover catogory, the group is headed by the Toyota Fortuner for its parts basket, followed by the Haval and the Subaru Forester. First in the servicing section is the Nissan X-Trail, followed by the Fortuner and the Forester. The Forester leads the way in the repair category. Second is newcomer, the Opel Grandland, and third the Haval. On the accident front, the locally produced Fortuner has a substantial cost advantage over the Haval in second place, with the Ford Kuga in third spot. In the double-cab segment, the winner for its combined parts basket price is the Toyota Hilux, ahead of the Isuzu D-Max and the GWM Steed 6. Servicing honours go to the Hilux, followed by the GWM Steed 6 and the Isuzu D-Max. For repair work, Isuzu is ahead of the Hilux and Ford Ranger. The dreaded fender benders are less expensive in a Hilux – R69 646 – as opposed to an Isuzu at R77 803 and the Steed 6 at R77 860. For single cab parts baskets, the Nissan NP300 comes out tops, followed by the Isuzu D-Max and the Toyota Hilux. Servicing costs are least expensive for the NP300, followed by the Isuzu. The Isuzu D-Max is the most competitive for repair parts, with the NP300 and the Hilux tied for second spot. Crash parts are least painful if you own an NP300, with Hilux and Isuzu second and third, respectively. The least expensive vehicle of all vehicles to service and repair in this year’s survey is the NP200 – South Africa’s only remaining half-ton bakkie, built in Rosslyn, Pretoria. It’s total parts basket price is R49 823. 