From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: The South African National Energy Development Institute last month launched the first solar district heating system in South Africa at the Wits University’s Junction Campus, saving the buildings millions in energy costs a year. Marleny Arnoldi attended the launch. Marleny Arnoldi: The Wits Junction district heating project combines solar, cogeneration and gas heating technologies to cater for just over 1 100 students, across 14 residence buildings, which consume around 94 000 ℓ of hot water a day. The installation comprised a 600 m2 solar heating plant and should save R40-million over the next 20 years. BlackDot Energy CEO Wally Weber tells us more about the project implementation. BlackDot Energy CEO Wally Weber: Marleny Arnoldi:  With renewable energy on the rise in South Africa, government has a crucial involvement in these kinds of projects, with continued funding towards research and training. Department of Higher Education and Training director-general Gwebinkundla Qonde gives his insight.  Department of Higher Education and Training director-general Gwebinkundla Qonde: Marleny Arnoldi:  Weber attributed the success of the project to solid public private partnerships and shares what is more to come from Wits.  BlackDot Energy CEO Wally Weber:  Sashnee Moodley:  Other news making headlines: Fujifilm South Africa has revamped and relaunched its innovation centre in Roodepoort to showcase its ever-increasing medical system capabilities. Natasha Odendaal tells us more. Natasha Odendaal: Fujifilm South Africa’s strong lineage of medical systems, digital and computer radiography systems and X-ray film are starting to overshadow its traditional, more well-known photographic and film divisions. Fujifilm South Africa MD Takeo Hata tells us more. Fujifilm South Africa MD Takeo Hata: Natasha Odendaal:  While often perceived as a film and photography company, Fujifilm positioned itself as a medical imaging specialist, maintaining focus on technological innovations, with investments in digital radiography, endoscopy, ultrasound, healthcare information technology, contract development and manufacturing, regenerative medicine and new drug development.  Fujifilm South Africa MD Takeo Hata: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.