The most powerful Ferrari ever has the tiniest bit of a South African rainbow hidden under the hood. The new SF90 Stradale – Ferrari’s first series production plug-in hybrid electric vehicle – is powered by a 4-l twin-turbocharged engine delivering 574 kW of power and 800 Nm of torque, taking it from zero to 100 km/h in 2.5 seconds. A trio of electric motors adds a further 162 kW, bringing the total power of the combined system to 736 kW. UK-based axial-flux electric motors manufacturer, YASA, which specialises in electric motors for automotive and aerospace applications, has developed a custom version of its electric motor for the SF90 Stradale. YASA is 26% owned by Universal Partners (UP), which is one of two major investors in the privately held company. UP, in turn, is an investment holding company with a primary listing on the stock exchange of Mauritius, and a secondary listing on the JSE’s Alternative Exchange, in South Africa. UP’s shareholder base is largely South African. UP invests in high potential growth businesses, with a particular focus on the UK. YASA holds great potential through its innovative approach to electrification, states UP CEO Pierre Joubert. “With its sights set on revolutionising electric motors, YASA has developed and commercialised a patented technology, enabling it to manufacture a range of electric motors, generators and controllers with superior performance characteristics. “The company’s solution for the SF90 Stradale allows world-leading power density – in this instance 14 kW/kg –  to deliver unparalleled vehicle performance, while reducing vehicle weight.” YASA’s motors and controllers are well suited to hybrid applications where limited space is available, adds Joubert. “In comparison to other technologies, the YASA motors are smaller, lighter and easier to manufacture. They produce exceptionally high power and torque, as independently confirmed by a premier European automotive engineering consultancy.” Joubert believes that electrification is a burgeoning opportunity for investors, where many auto makers are promising an electric model of some description in every nameplate from 2020. Electric vehicles (EVs) are expected to account for 11% of vehicles sold globally within six years, with EVs surpassing sales of internal combustion engine cars by 2040. “We are patient investors with a permanent capital structure. We are committed to achieving the best long-term outcomes for both the businesses we invest in and for our investors,” notes Joubert. Prior to joining UP, Joubert was the chief investment officer of investment holding company Richmark. Before that he spent 13 years at Rand Merchant Bank, fulfilling various roles, including senior transactor in the corporate finance division, head of equities and co-head of the global markets divisions. 