From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Builders Warehouse opened its latest store in Boksburg, in April. The new 15 170 m2 box format store design entailed a new layout and look-and-feel to align with Builders’ digitalisation and counter-driven strategy. Marleny Arnoldi attended the opening. Marleny Arnoldi: The new store has replaced the adjacent former Boksburg store, and now offers a premium hardware retail experience through a combination of online integration, departmental adjacencies and new services that deliver seamless shopping for contractors, building professionals and DIY customers. CEO Llewellyn Walters tells us more about the three-dimensional printing offering in particular. Builders CEO Llewellyn Walters: Marleny Arnoldi:  Another unique feature in this store is the “smart home” section, which shows how smart devices can be linked in a home and Builders offers advice on smart home solutions. Walters shares where the concept came from and how it benefits the customer.  Builders CEO Llewellyn Walters: Marleny Arnoldi: Compared with the old store the new building runs between 30% and 40% cheaper and is more efficient in terms of energy and water. Walters explains how the building is rigged with eco-friendly initiatives. Builders CEO Llewellyn Walters: Marleny Arnoldi: The Builders store is filled with feedback systems and the company values customer input. Customer analytics was particularly used in aiding the look-and-feel of the store, which will also be rolled out in other stores. Builders marketing director Anton Steyn tells us more about the data gathering and inspiration that went into creating the store. Builders marketing director Anton Steyn: Sashnee Moodley:  Other news making headlines:  Defy unveils regional experience centre to showcase latest tech Home appliance manufacturer Defy intends to give both retailers and consumers “an experience” of its latest technologies and innovations at its recently-unveiled regional experience centre. Simone Liedtke gives us the details. Simone Liedtke: The regional experience centre, which hosts a museum documenting Defy’s progress since 1993, was crafted based on the company’s expansion needs, and will assist in gearing up for the next decade. Defy’s regional marketing director tells us a bit more. Defy regional marketing director Rajan Gangiah: Simone Liedtke: In speaking to Engineering News in April, he also highlights some of the products and technologies on show at the centre. Defy regional marketing director Rajan Gangiah: Simone Liedtke: He further tells Engineering News a little about the company’s initiatives and projects that it has in place to increase Defy’s growth in sub-Saharan Africa and touches on how the center speaks to this. Defy regional marketing director Rajan Gangiah: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.