Growthpoint initiative Property Point and JSE-listed Fortress Real Estate Investment Trust (REIT) have partnered to roll out an enterprise and supplier development (ESD) programme in the property sector. The programme provides extensive insight to small businesses on becoming market and funding ready, giving owners the tools to strengthen their businesses to access new opportunities within the property sector. Fortress will develop small businesses using the Property Point performance programme and will support linkages between qualifying small businesses and procurement opportunities within the group. In just over a decade, Property Point has facilitated market opportunities worth R1.4-billion for the 173 small and medium-sized enterprises that have taken part in its two-year ESD programme, which has helped to create more than 2 500 full-time jobs. In welcoming Fortress to Property Point’s growing network of partners, Property Point and Growthpoint corporate social responsibility head Shawn Theunissen says that, through its investment, Fortress is demonstrating that it is committed to transformation and that it will play a significant role in building better businesses in the property sector. “We are very pleased to partner with Property Point and their award-winning programme. We are looking forward to making a significant difference by equipping small business owners and contributing to the transformation of our country,” Fortress’ Jodie Ellinor-Dreyer adds. Theunissen says the collaborative approach has a multiplier effect on successful transformation, small business development, unlocking supply chain opportunities and creating jobs. “We have noted far-reaching positive impacts for everyone directly involved, the property sector and the South African economy,” he adds. Property Point’s partners span both the private and public sectors and include Growthpoint Properties, Attacq and Fortress REIT, as well as the Department of Small Business Development and the Small Enterprise Development Agency.