From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Food and Beverage company Libstar Group’s Dickon Hall Foods facility will allow the company to not just increase its customer relationship advantage but also allow it to develop additional channels. Simone Liedtke tells us more. Simone Liedtke: Keeping in mind that the Southdale-based Dickon Hall Foods is the place where it all began for Libstar in South Africa, Dickon Hall Foods business unit head Niel van Heerden tells us a little more about the facility. Dickon Hall Foods business unit head Niel Van Heerden: Simone Liedtke: Naturally, a wet sauce facility wouldn’t be anything without the products it produces. For this reason, Van Heerden elaborates a little on the facility’s volumes for us. Dickon Hall Foods business unit head Niel Van Heerden: Simone Liedtke: Considering the multiple sectors and industries which are currently taking strain amid a tough business environment in South Africa, Van Heerden highlights how factors such as constant innovation, automation and understanding the gaps play a role in mitigating this tough environment, and its related challenges. Dickon Hall Foods business unit head Niel Van Heerden: Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines: Heavy Haul Game Changer And, Telkom’s mobile division lifts group’s full-year performance International Heavy Haul Association chairperson believes collaboration is the key to ensuring that global heavy haul operators mitigate the risks associated with the Fourth Industrial Revolution and capitalise on the emerging opportunities. IHHA chairperson Brian Monakali: Telkom’s mobile division elevated its overall operating revenue, headline earnings and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation for the financial year ended March 31. Telkom CEO Sipho Maseko:  Sashnee Moodley:  That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.