Growthpoint Properties has secured JSE-listed technology group Altron as a tenant for the 29 000 m2 Woodlands office park, in Woodmead, Sandton. Altron will take up occupancy at the office park in November 2020, with the group’s nine operating companies to be housed under one roof, which is expected to enable greater efficiency, collaboration, innovation and cost-saving. The space is currently occupied by Deloitte, which will leave the park at the end of March 2020 to make way for Altron. Before the Altron group moves in, Growthpoint will invest a considerable amount to modernise, customise and connect eight buildings to Altron’s requirements. “We are pleased to sign a business of the high-calibre of Altron for the Woodlands and look forward to working closely with them,” Growthpoint South Africa CEO Estienne de Klerk said in a statement issued on Monday. “Growthpoint has secured a strong listed entity with a solid record on a long lease, and accomplished this well before the Deloitte tenancy is up.” “Our intention is to have a workplace that caters for our needs as the employer in creating an environment that promotes employee excellence through collaboration, creative thinking, visibility of leadership and the free flow of communication,” Altron Group CE Mteto Nyati said. “We also want our workplace to meet the needs of our employees who don't only want a modern workplace but appreciate additional lifestyle services such as on-site gym facilities, a crèche, concierge services and the like,” he added. The Woodlands is unique in that it includes its very own game park which is home to Springbok, Blesbok and other smaller animals. A key feature of the Altron project will be the construction of a new walkway to link all the buildings together. Growthpoint will also deliver a turnkey internal fit-out solution, beginning with a workplace study, to ensure the space is tailored for Altron’s personnel and optimised for high performance. The upgraded campus is designed to receive a 4-Star Green Star rating from the Green Building Council of South Africa – an independent certification of the campus’ resource- and cost-efficiency. “We are happy to enhance our assets in the Woodlands, as we are seeing demand in the node. Altron’s commitment to the Woodlands is a vote of confidence for the park, as well as for Woodmead as a whole,” added De Klerk. Altron will relocate to its new premises in three phases – November 2020, March 2021 and April 2021.