The Small Business Institute (SBI) on Tuesday launched an Instagram account to showcase products and services offered by small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in South Africa. Some of the information that is shared on Instagram will be amplified by SBI’s other social media platforms. “The idea was motivated by people tweeting photos of things they make,” said SBI policy and advocacy executive Jennifer Cohen. She added that she is always inspired when she sees requests by entrepreneurs for others to re-tweet a photo of something that they have made, “with the hope that their next customer is in our timelines”, she said. The SBI is a national chamber organisation and a member of Business Unity South Africa. Its main focus this year is to grow its network of business chambers – particularly in small towns and townships – to interact fruitfully with municipalities where the “tyre hits the tarmac”. The national organisation advocates for evidence-based discussion and policy around issues of importance to SMEs. “Limiting obstacles to entrepreneurial success and sustainability will help South Africa’s economy grow, transform and become more inclusive,” said Cohen. SBI also supports a competitive, ethical private sector.  Big business should promote access to markets and effective entry into supply chains and pay their invoices on time. “Our chambers are made up of small businesses; research from our partner SBP has highlighted for years the red tape, compliance requirements and challenging business environment SMEs in South Africa face. We hope this initiative can help buyers and sellers find each other to build micro, small and medium businesses in this country – 11-million job-seekers are depending on it,” noted Cohen. SBI will also share good ideas for networking, professional development and notifications from its chamber members, as well as highlighting speakers or panellists at its upcoming SME Indabas. The Instagram account is @SBI_SouthAfrica. Small business owners should submit a picture, their contact details or a website address and a brief sales pitch for their product and services to engage@smallbusinessinstitute.co.za. The SBI won’t endorse, but will showcase what SMEs would like to promote.