Construction company Concor Buildings anticipates completion of construction on Phase 2 of the Oxford Parks project, in Rosebank, in September 2020. Concor in February started construction on Phase 2 of the mixed-use development, following the completion of the construction of Phase 1 last year. Phase 2 comprises two office buildings, with each block designed to achieve a four-star green rating, as certified by the Green Building Council South Africa’s Green Star System. The design has prioritised energy efficiency and includes the use of less cement and concrete materials. The first block – section one of the Phase 2 project – will have three office levels of more than 2 800 m2 gross building area (GBA), which will be built on four basement levels measuring about 11 000 m2. There will also be a retail component on the ground floor comprising 670 m2 gross leasable area (GLA). The GLA of the office levels will amount to more than 2 500 m2. The first block is earmarked for completion in January 2020, while the second block is expected to be completed in September 2020. The second block will comprise five office levels and four basement levels. Office space will measure about 8 750 m2 and almost 9 700 m2 GBA, while the basement area measures 12 440 m2. It will also include a ground floor retail component, measuring 1 047 m2 GLA. Concor contract manager Chris Maritz says difficult trading conditions continue to be experienced in Gauteng’s private sector construction segment, which was also seen with Phase 1 of the project, making for tight margins and demanding close control on site, to ensure that all the necessary processes and quality systems are applied. “The project deadline will be challenging to meet, especially with heavy rain experienced in February, which directly impacts site progress.” He adds that the foundation conditions on site are not ideal, with varying rock levels that result in a mix of pile caps and foundations being employed. While pile caps are used where load bearing piles can be installed, the foundations are required where excavations for bases need to reach bedrock, resulting in deep excavations that require substantial mass concrete. To ensure deadlines are met, Maritz points out that stairs for fire escapes will be completed ‘off-shutter’ to reduce the time and resources associated with final granolithic treads and risers. The use of unitised panels for the buildings’ façades will also reduce the need for façade scaffolding, as these units can be installed from the inside. Another innovation on the project will be to install the reinforcing of basement columns to a height that spans two levels at a time. This allows a more efficient process of shuttering and pouring columns, that will further contribute to the pace of development of the project.