To combat the entrenched, growing inequality, unemployment, and poverty in South Africa, more small, medium-sized and microenterprises (SMMEs) should be included in the economy and greater levels of localisation must be pursued. This was a key message that emerged from presentations delivered at the Proudly South Africa (PSA) Buy Local Summit & Expo, on Tuesday. Speaking at the summit, in Johannesburg, PSA CEO Eustace Mashimbye lamented that the country has a high level of imported products, which results in a loss of local production and jobs in the country. To counteract this, he encouraged increased local buying, facilitated predominantly by SMMEs, as this would create more jobs. “Thriving economies around the world are built on strong SMMEs.” As part of its mandate, PSA aims to provide access to the market for SMMEs. As part of initiatives to broaden market access for SMMEs, PSA developed an online shopping store, RSA Made, which offers an online platform to showcase local brands. The platform provides access to high-quality, vetted local products. Listing on the website is free for PSA members, Mashimbye enthused. This platform is posited to facilitate job retention and create a multiplier effect. Another means for SMMEs to gain market access is through public sector support. Mashimbye indicated that the government has outlined 23 products which must be locally produced and that this presents an opportunity for SMMEs to provide these. The list is available on the Department of Trade and Industry’s website. Moreover, PSA is also facilitating greater market access through migrating its database to the central supplier database by the end of this year, to position its members as potential suppliers to government. Further, PSA also hosts procurement forums to enhance market access. The Buy Local Summit was highlighted as an important platform in strengthening market access for SMMEs. Small Business Development Deputy Minister Cassel Mathale extolled that the expo serves as a platform to showcase and prove that South Africa has the necessary capabilities and capacity to provide quality products and services. The summit features over 200 PSA member companies showcasing their local products and services, as well as panel discussions and presentations. AFRICAN PERSPECTIVE Also speaking at the summit was Brand Leadership Group founder and CEO Thebe Ikalafeng, who spoke on the important topic of African brands and how these are challenging global brands. Ikalafeng emphasised that international brands do not understand, respect and cater for the African market and its needs. Moreover, international brands often come to the continent and expropriate its resources and ideas, and sell it off as their own at much higher prices, he said. He spoke out against seeking international acknowledgement for African ideas, products and services. Instead, he called for countries on the continent to hone their entrepreneurial spirit, create local products and services and buy local. Through this, more jobs will be created and money will be retained in the country, said Ikalafeng.