Defence and Military Veterans Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula announced on Wednesday the appointment or reappointment of four members to the Defence Force Service Commission (DFSC). Originally established in 2009, by law the DFSC must have no fewer than eight and no more than ten members, with six forming a quorum. Since the ending of the terms of seven of the members (“commissioners”) last September, the DFSC has been inquorate. The new appointments mean that the commission can function again. Its primary role is to carry out research and propose improvements in the salaries and conditions of service of the personnel of the South African National Defence Force. In line with legislation, a nominations committee was set up, which considered 70 nominations. The committee then made its recommendations to the Minister. The four successful candidates were – University of KwaZulu-Natal human resources executive director Dr Siphelele Zulu; medical doctor, former member of the South African Military Health Services and now Aquarius Healthcare board chairman Dr Ziyaad Essop; AME Africa Healthcare human resource manager Advocate Nokuzola Gloria Khumalo; and former Gauteng Provincial official, now retired, Ian Hugh Robertson. Robertson is a reappointment; the other three are new appointments. The DFSC must meet at least twice a year. All four commissioners have been appointed on a part-time basis and have five-year terms. Only those not employed full-time by the State will receive payment. As there are only two women on the reconstituted DFSC, it has been decided to advertise for three more women to join the commission. “The appointment of the new commissioners is undoubtedly a step in the right direction and will be of great assistance to the work of the commission, especially when one considers the amount of work ahead of them,” said Mapisa-Nqakula. “Fortunately, the other members who have been with the DFSC for longer will ensure that there is continuity in the work of the commission, because so much was done and achieved by the previous DFSC.”