Gauteng Premier David Makhura has appointed the Commission of Inquiry into Minibus Taxi-Type Service Violence, Fatalities and Instability in Gauteng. The commission will investigate the underlying causes and people behind the ongoing killings in the taxi industry in the province. The commission will be chaired by Justice Jeremiah Buti Shongwe with Rudolph Lungile Mabece and Hlula Msimang as members of the commission. Dimakatso Mamiki Selesho will be secretary to the commission. Makhura made a commitment to appoint the commission of inquiry in July during the second Gauteng Taxi Summit. The Gauteng provincial government is concerned that the taxi industry is submerged in violence, which continues to worsen despite efforts by law enforcement agencies and government. The taxi industry transports more than 75% of commuters during the daily peak hour period, which makes it the dominant mode of transport in the province. The commission is appointed to enquire into and investigate, make findings, report on and make recommendations in a number of regards. This includes the underlying reasons for the recurring conflict, violence, fatalities and instability within the minibus taxi-type service industry within Gauteng. Secondly, the activities of operators, legal and illegal, as well as any other groups or persons that contribute to the recurring conflict, violence, fatalities and instability. Thirdly, the provision of minibus taxi transport services authorised by both interchange- and direct route-based permits and licences. Fourthly, how the minibus taxi business model, including the formation and management of minibus taxi associations, contributes to the recurring conflict, violence, fatalities and instability. Lastly, any other matters that are ancillary or related to the matters set out above. Makhura has given the commission six months to complete its work and submit its report and recommendations in writing. Further, the commission may, where necessary, refer those implicated to law enforcement agencies for further investigation or prosecution. Any person or section of the public, including community organisations, minibus taxi associations, drivers, operators, conductors and rank marshals, that is in possession of information which may be relevant to matters which will be enquired into by the commission, and wishes to give evidence before the commission, is invited to contact the secretary of the commission. The secretary of the commission will announce the contact details of the commission in due course.