Germany-based global defence and civilian sensors group Hensoldt officially launched its new, consolidated South African subsidiary on Wednesday night. The new company is Hensoldt South Africa, which combines the previously separate Hensoldt Optronics South Africa and GEW Technologies. “Consolidating GEW and Optronics under the Hensoldt brand is an important strategic step towards the future growth of our South African business,” affirmed Hensoldt CEO Thomas Müller. “We will leverage the power of the Hensoldt brand and our global footprint to open new market opportunities for our South African business.” “This is a major step towards our Hensoldt South Africa growth strategy and the creation of a South African sensor solution house,” highlighted Hensoldt executive board member Celia Pelaz. “Our experience in the country shows that international investment and cooperation that has been added to local infrastructure, skills and capacity is the perfect mix for business success and local economy [sic] growth.” The two precursor companies of Hensoldt South Africa had a combined annual turnover of more than R1.5-billion. Following the creation of the consolidated local subsidiary, the Hensoldt group plans to invest R500-million in South Africa. The aim is to double Hensoldt South Africa’s turnover and staff compliment (which currently stands at 600, all South Africans) over the next five years. It is also intended to expand Hensoldt South Africa’s product line. While maintaining production of all its current products, it will add offerings in the fields of data links, identification friend or foe systems, radar, business development, and customer services Furthermore, it will enlarge its international markets. Target areas are Africa, Asia-Pacific, Europe, Latin America and the Middle East. “We have the competency and capacity in South Africa to build a global organisation from the South African base,” asserted Hensoldt South Africa MD Rynier van der Watt. “Our positioning is, we are a sensor solutions house. We want to be the number one sensor solutions house in the world”.