Southern African roto moulder and water tank producer JoJo Tanks has acquired wastewater and sanitation specialist Calcamite. This continues JoJo’s transformation into a water solutions company, and follows its expansion into pumps and filtration products. The recently concluded deal with Calcamite provides JoJo with the capability to provide solutions in the growing domestic wastewater management space. “We are focused on growing the business beyond water storage into a full water solutions company,” says JoJo MD Grant Neser. “We started slowly by supplying domestic pressure pumps to the market some years back. Earlier this year, we launched our filtration range and this acquisition provides us with a strong position in the domestic wastewater sector.” “Water and sanitation are invariably linked and that is why Calcamite is a perfect fit for JoJo. Without suitable wastewater management we cannot have quality water and without quality water we cannot have good sanitation,” explains Neser. He points out that there is an urgent need for practical, fit-for-purpose on-site wastewater and sanitation solutions in South Africa, which is an area Calcamite specialises in. “Calcamite has a sound reputation in the wastewater sector, with technical know-how developed over many years of practical, hands-on participation in the industry, which was crucial to the deal,” says Neser. “We also share similar values in that both companies are committed to the manufacture and supply of products and solutions that meet society’s needs.” “Since its formation in 1967, Calcamite has evolved into a vertically integrated, full turnkey on-site sanitation solution provider,” says Calcamite CEO John Telford. “Our Biomite on-site wastewater treatment system and our ability to design, manufacture, supply, install and maintain these systems, is what sets us apart,” he adds. JoJo and Calcamite will continue to trade and operate as separate entities, but complementary and synergistic opportunities will be pursued at management and corporate levels to strengthen their respective positions in the domestic water solutions market.