The South African Airways Pilots Association (SAAPA) says its members are willing to embark on lawful industrial action to save the State-owned airline, if the association's demands for leadership changes at SAA are not met. In a statement issued on Thursday, the association said the skills deficit at SAA had to be dealt with "with urgency". "The vast majority of recent appointments are in an ‘acting’ capacity reminiscent of the Dudu Myeni era, where appointments were made based on allegiances instead of skills and experience. In the last 18 months, two expensive organisational designs were carried out and yet nothing has been implemented. "SAA will not recover unless critical operational and technical deficiencies are immediately addressed by a strong leadership team. It is imperative that every member of this team has the necessary skills and experience to turn around the business and to ensure its sustainability going forward," it stressed. SAAPA said numerous engagements between the association and the airline had not yielded any outcomes or given the association confidence in the future of the airline. It pointed out that it had, in August, sent a letter of demand to SAA, calling for the appointment, within 90 days, of a CEO whose previous work experience includes the post of CEO and who has specialised skills and experience in the turnaround of an airline similar in size to SAA; the appointment of a retired or active pilot to the SAA board; the restructuring of flight operations, based on the structure of several world-class leading airlines and best practice; a skills audit of all GMs and heads of departments, including those in acting positions; and compliance with and adherence to collective agreements between the airline and the association. "We trust that the company will consider our demands with the seriousness required. If not, we will be left with no choice. Our pilots have indicated that – if necessary – they are willing to embark on lawful industrial action to save the airline. The decision to embark on industrial action is not one that the pilots of SAA will take lightly. Indeed, if such a strike is embarked upon, it would be for the first time in SAA’s 80-year history. "SAAPA’s intention is not to add to SAA’s problems. On the contrary, our goal is to put an end to the continual pressure on the fiscus in the form of bailouts and guarantees and, ultimately, to help put the airline on the road to recovery," the association said. SAAPA in June threatened to embark on industrial action at the airline, following the appointment of interim CEO Zukisa Ramasia. She was appointed to the position following former CEO Vuyani Jarana's decision to quit the airline, citing a lack of financial support from government for his turnaround strategy. The embattled airline has struggled financially for years and has received many bailouts from government. Earlier this month, in a presentation before a Parliamentary committee, the airline welcomed the latest cash injection of R5.5-billion that had been approved for the 2019/20 financial year, but said it would require more funding. Reuters reported on September 18 that the airline's turnaround strategy would require a R22-billion equity injection. 