Situated in the heart of Sandton's business district and standing taller than any other building in Africa, at 234 m, The Leonardo is only a couple of weeks away from being officially unveiled. As of this week, residential units have been put on the market for potential buyers. The Leonardo is the latest venture by property developer the Legacy Group and was built in partnership with Nedbank Corporate and Investment Banking. To date, construction has totaled R3-billion for the 56-storey multi-use tower block. More than 100 000 t of concrete was used in its construction. The tower features a range of amenities, including a spa, preschool, restaurant, conference centre and a 25-m-long swimming pool. In addition, a variety of local artists' work graces the walls in high-traffic areas within the building.

To ensure anyone passing through the building has ease of access, the full-length elevator is capable of traversing the full height of the tower, from ground level to the fifty-sixth storey in 57 seconds.

The Leonardo is also supported with electrical back-up generators capable of meeting 100% of the building's power requirements, as does its air conditioning system, thereby ensuring tenants, guests and visitors uninterrupted convenience. The Leonardo houses retail tenants on the ground floor, as well as The Leonardo Lounge, bar and deli kitchen, in addition to the Leonardo Conference Centre on the third floor. Level 7 encompasses the tower's recreational facilities, which include the Aurum Restaurant, Nature & Nurture Montessori preschool, an outdoor pool and deck with a gym and spa, five daybeds and a wood-fired themed restaurant - the Octo Bar. Rising above the seventh floor is the tower itself, housing offices on the lower section of the tower and residential units mid-way. The upper seven floors accommodate eight duplex penthouse suites, while the top three floors house the luxurious Leonardo Suite, which will be allocated to a single tenant willing to pay handsomely (in the region of about $18-million to $19-million) for a one-of-a-kind accommodation featuring 360° views and a private pool. The roof is reserved for a private bar and entertainment deck to accommodate a small group of guests.