UD Trucks Southern Africa (UDTSA) has introduced the new Quon extra-heavy truck range to the local market. The new range has an array of fresh technologies to cater for increasingly sophisticated customer demands. “Our definition of simple has changed,” says UDTSA MD Gert Swanepoel. “It’s more than before. We relooked at what is deemed essential. “The new Quon moves us into a stronger position in the South African truck industry.” UDTSA hopes to this year reclaim it position as top-selling UD trucks market outside Japan, after Indonesia recently stole that crown from the local company. Featuring eight derivatives, the new Quon Euro 5 range includes four 6 x 4 rigid models and four 6 x 4 truck-tractor options. It is especially suited to the distribution, petrochemical and fast-moving consumer goods market segments, notes UDTSA marketing director Rory Schulz. Inside the truck, the cockpit features steering wheel switches, improved visibility and a 12 V power socket. The new ESCOT-VI electronically controlled automatic transmission has a simple straight shift pattern, as well as the ability to navigate muddy conditions. A UD telematics system also provides technical assistance to the driver and fleet owner, in the form of fuel consumption measurements, vehicle tracking and geofencing, and so forth. All models feature disc brakes as standard. Under the hood, the new Quon range features an 11-litre GH11 engine, which promises to cut fuel consumption by more than 5% compared with the previous model. The truck also features the Nenpi fuel coach, which displays driving advice to achieve further improvement in fuel economy. Also contributing to the Quon’s improved fuel efficiency is a reduction in weight, achieving gains in load-carrying capacity of up to 200 kg, as well as lower air resistance.

Technology upgrades include the use of the UD Trucks traffic eye brake system, which uses radar and a cabin-mounted camera for dual-monitoring of the road ahead, braking in time should the driver fail to do so. A lane departure warning system alerts drivers when they stray across lanes. Driver alert support warns the driver if the system detects inattentive or drowsy driving. Adaptive cruise control adapts the distance to the vehicle in front in accordance to a selected time-gap and the speed of the subject vehicle by controlling the engine, powertrain and brakes of the Quon. Yet another new system, UD stability control, detects conditions in which the truck could become unstable, such as tight curves or slippery road surfaces, with the system applying control appropriate to engine output and braking power to each tire to maintain stability.