JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – JSE-listed drilling solutions company Master Drilling’s acquisition of Atlantis Group helped to boost its revenue and regional operations in the six months ended June 30. CEO Danie Pretorius on Tuesday said the company remained committed to diversifying its presence across geographies, commodities and sectors. “We have worked hard to position our existing businesses across regions, while stabilising new operations and growing our presence in new territories where we believe opportunities will arise, such as in Russia and Australia.” The acquisition of Atlantis Group contributed to a 3.8% year-on-year increase in revenue to $70-million, but operating profit decreased by 8.3% year-on-year to $11.8-million. Profit after tax decreased by 14.7% year-on-year to $8.3-million. In the reporting period, Master Drilling achieved a 5.6% year-on-year increase in headline earnings per share (HEPS) to 76.7c apiece, in rand terms. However, in dollar terms, HEPS decreased by 8.5% year-on-year to $0.05, as a result of the stronger rand. The company’s new business pipeline remains solid at $297.1-million and the order book at $198-million. Pretorius explained that a dividend would be considered at year-end. “While political and economic factors continue to shape our operating environment, we continue to spearhead technological development, stabilise our global footprint and explore new business opportunities. “As a result, the business remains stable and well positioned to benefit from an improved global economic climate,” said Pretorius. Master Drilling is a technology-driven business. Its focus is on developing solutions that enhance clients’ operations and safety performance. Because of this, the bulk of its capital spend is on capacity expansion, some of which has begun to yield positive results, such as through the introduction of remote drilling technology. Having completed testing of this technology in South Africa, Master Drilling has successfully implemented it in Mexico and Peru. Further, the commissioning of a mobile tunnel borer is under way, with underground drilling having already commenced, while the first phase of the shaft boring system – a new shaft sinking system – is also being commissioned. “This bears testament to Master Drilling’s unwavering commitment to technology development and testing, which will continue to be a key focus during the remainder of 2019,” noted Pretorius. He added that global trade remained under pressure, impacting negatively on commodity markets and creating uncertainty around the future demand for and consumption of commodities. Nonetheless, he believes the business is well positioned to withstand these adverse conditions and to continue to deliver desirable, efficient and safe drilling solutions when the inevitable upturn materialises. AFRICAN PIPELINE
Although Africa's significance in terms of revenue had been in decline in recent years, Master Drilling continued to be active on the continent, maintaining a presence in seven countries, including South Africa. Projects are progressing satisfactorily in Mali and Sierra Leone, with two machines deployed on site in Sierra Leone. There are also projects under way in the Democratic Republic of Congo, among which is the Kibali gold project and the Kamoa copper project, where the company will consider deploying an additional machine. In Ghana, following some geological issues on the initial project, the company expects to start work on additional projects in the next few months. Master Drilling has been awarded a new two-phase contract, also in Ghana, that includes deploying a big machine to drill a vent shaft and, in the second phase, work underground. Master Drilling expects this contract to yield more scope going forward. Meanwhile, operations in Zambia have scaled down significantly. Work at the Lubambe copper mine continues and is nearing completion. In South Africa, the company said activity in the mining sector remained constrained, amid the uncertain economic climate and recent industrial action in the sectors that the company operated in. However, Master Drilling was recently awarded a contract for a 1.4 km hoisting shaft, which was the first of a number of shafts that could be drilled. In neighbouring Botswana, new opportunities had presented themselves in gas and exploration drilling, confirmed Pretorius.