The Portfolio Committee on Communications has called for members of the public and organisations to nominate suitable persons to fill five vacancies at the council of the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa). One of the five vacancies will be filled immediately, and the rest will be filled in April 2020 upon the expiry of the term of office of the four current councillors. Persons appointed to the council must be South African citizens permanently residing in the country who are committed to fairness, freedom of expression, openness and accountability. Moreover, they must be representative of a broad cross-section of the population of South Africa. They are also required to possess suitable qualifications, expertise and experience in the fields of, besides others, broadcasting, electronic communications and postal policy or operations, public policy development, electronic engineering, law, information technology, content in any form, consumer protection, education, economics, finance or any other related expertise or qualifications. Icasa creates regulations and policies to govern broadcasting and telecommunications in the public interest. “Written nominations must contain the full name and address of the institution as well as of the individual making the nomination; the nominee’s signed acceptance of the nomination and his or her curriculum vitae, with information including, full name; ID number; gender; contact address; telephone and fax numbers as well as email address; previous experience which quotes the dates and organisations concerned; certified copies of academic qualifications and, identity document,” says committee chairperson Boyce Maneli. All nominations and enquiries should be addressed to the committee secretary, Thembinkosi Ngoma, at 3rd floor, 90 Plein Street, Cape Town, 8000. Alternatively, they can be emailed to tngoma@parliament.gov.za or faxed to 086 522 5740. Telephonic enquiries can be made to 021 403 3733 or 083 709 8407. The closing date for nominations is Friday, September 27, at 16:00.