A fast-growing app-based service, the Waste Recycling App (Wrapp), is bringing convenience and simplicity to businesses and professionals who need waste removed from worksites. National roll-out of the app is planned for the end of this year, with the service currently available to more than 700 clients across Cape Town, Johannesburg and Durban. The app brings together independent truck owners and customers who need waste removed, through an easy-to-use mobile application. According to the statement published on Tuesday, Wrapp enables the easy ordering and tracking of waste recycling services, similar to the likes of app-based taxi and food delivery services. Founder Clive Amsel explains that the rationale is to spare customers the hassle of sorting out waste, while simultaneously creating work for truck owners in an environmentally conscious way. Apart from saving customers time, Amsel stresses that Wrapp also creates work opportunities. “It’s one of the most satisfying aspects of what we do,” he enthuses. “I think our customers recognise the potential this technology opens up for South Africans.” All service providers are vetted and approved by Wrapp and their vehicles are subject to quarterly checks to ensure roadworthiness. Service providers’ compliance with national waste regulations is also checked regularly. Service providers move most types of recyclables and solid waste, using skip bins, roll-on roll-off bins and tipper trucks that come with their own loading staff. Some also handle sand and stone delivery. The app allows a customer to choose the waste type, truck type and pick-up time for loads from between 1.3 t to 12 t, with quotes on removal received within 60 seconds, all on the app. Payment happens after delivery, either through a credit card payment gateway on the app or through an electronic funds transfer. With live tracking and notifications, Amsel notes that there is “no need to follow up” on the status of the order with calls or texts. Additionally, the cloud-based dashboard gives customers access to a full audit trail with time stamps of every load’s life cycle, from removal to recycling or disposal, and also features useful graphic breakdowns of the data. Orders are processed instantly on the app, with the closest available truck dispatched and scheduled for the job. After completion, customers are also able to rate the truck driver’s service, which the app uses to report an average rating for the last year. The app is available for Android devices from the Google Play store, and sign-up to the service is done in under 90 seconds on the Wrapp website or the app itself.