Management of OR Tambo International Airport have indicated that its strategy to boost air cargo volumes will be considerately enhanced by the airport becoming global logistics giant FedEx’s first location in Africa to welcome regularly scheduled flights. Though FedEx operates about 680 of its own planes throughout the world, this is the first time any of its all-cargo aircraft have included a regularly scheduled flight landing in Africa. “We are proud to be the first location to receive a regularly scheduled flight in Africa. We welcome this tangible indication of optimism and belief in the long-term potential of the South African and African markets,” said OR Tambo International Airport GM Bongiwe Pityi-Vokwana. She indicated that the airport had handled some 380 000 t of cargo in the 2018/19 financial year. “We believe that being a scheduled location will enable us to offer expanded services that will boost our cargo operations.” “We are also pleased to acknowledge the FedEx commitment to modernising its air fleet and reducing its environmental impact by using more efficient and lower emission aircraft. This commitment is very much aligned to our own airport’s efforts to reduce carbon emissions,” added Pityi-Vokwana. OR Tambo International Airport was earlier this year upgraded to Level 2 (Reduction) status under the terms of the Airport Carbon Accreditation programme administered by Airports Council International (ACI). This is the only institutionally endorsed, global carbon management certification programme for airports. Pityi-Vokwana said the airport looked forward to developing its cargo operations in the next few years through the development of its new midfield cargo terminal. “The midfield cargo terminal will enhance South Africa’s status as an air traffic hub and drive new traffic through the country’s lead airport.” The new cargo precinct will cater for the cargo facilities and support services to enable the handling of 750 000 t/y of cargo. Phase 2 of the cargo infrastructure plan will allow for growth and expansion to accommodate up to two-million tonnes of cargo a year. The new facility will provide capacity for general cargo, specialised goods, as well as distribution and support services for the air cargo supply chain.