Energy Engineered Products, Multi Alloys and E-Metals Cape have joined forces under the EMVAfrica umbrella to create a “dynamic, single-source solutions provider and service suit” for customers on the African continent. Officially launched on Friday, EMVAfrica director Graham Witty tells Engineering News Online that the brand is the culmination of a three-year-long journey, which began when the three businesses realised that it was becoming difficult for each to communicate with customers in terms of service and product offerings, while also continuing investment into each of the offerings. By combining the three businesses into one, Witty explained, an increased focus will be placed on investing into growing one brand, while also growing the company’s presence in the market. Simultaneously, this will also allow EMVAfrica to streamline processes, increase its impact and buying power, strengthen its offerings and offer a complete solution to customers. According to Witty, EMVAfrica has leveraged and streamlined each of the founding company’s strengths, expertise and experience and that the company’s “360˚ approach in solving customers’ needs is what differentiates the business”. As specialists, EMVAfrica’s capabilities include sourcing the best products from around the world and creating packages for local projects, as well as projects in other parts of Africa and further abroad. Meanwhile, the company is also investing in the development of locally made products. EMVAfrica’s valves business, in particular, has, over the last three years, run a research and development programme to develop patented products. “We’re hoping that in the next 18 months or so, we’ll have a significant announcement to make [regarding] some products, which will fit into the local manufacturing of valves,” he said. Under the EMVAfrica brand, Multi Alloys’ product portfolio comprises nickel alloys, duplex and super duplex stainless steels, high-performance copper alloys and other niche products which are sourced from reliable and certified manufacturers. ENERGYMetals imports, stocks and distributes premium-quality industrial stainless steel. The division offers process materials such as pipe fittings, flanges, fasteners and heat exchanger tube, as well as engineering materials such as round bar, angle and flat bar, and polished decorative tube. ENERGYMetals supplies from stock or ex-mill for larger products. The ENERGYValves division, established primarily to complement the process materials offering, holds stock of stainless steel and special alloy valves. With stainless steel forming the bulk of the valves range, the division also offers valves in titanium, 904L, zirconium, nickel alloys, as well as numerous other high-performance alloys. In more recent times, the division has expanded its offering to include a range of pneumatic actuators, which are used to control valves remotely in a challenging environment. The division’s extensive technical expertise in special alloys provides an in-depth understanding of their performance in corrosive and challenging industrial environments. EMVAfrica is a level three broad-based black economic empowerment company, whose product portfolio is ISO 9001 accredited.