Russian nuclear energy corporation Rosatom on Monday announced that applications were open for scholarships for African students to help develop the next generation of African nuclear scientists and engineers. The scholarships fund tuition fees in full and living expenses in part. “The goal of the scholarship is to support interest in nuclear research and capabilities among young African scientists and engineers, and contribute to solving some of the world's most critical issues in the nearest future, allowing for the continent to be self-sufficient,” said Rosatom Central and Southern Africa CEO Dmitry Shornikov in a statement. Scholarships are available for students interested in studying nuclear energy related fields in Russia and include tuition fees and free preparatory courses of Russian language, depending on the university programme. Students have access to subsidised accommodation, library funds and practical experience at Russian nuclear enterprises. Several study options are available at Russian universities specialising in nuclear engineering such as the National Research Nuclear University, in Central Russia, and the Tomsk Polytechnic University (TPU), in Siberia. TPU is the only Russian university equipped with a nuclear research reactor available for foreign students. The university offers bachelor’s degrees in nuclear physics and technology; a master’s degree in nuclear power installations operation and nuclear medicine; and a postgraduate degree in nuclear, thermal and renewable energy and related technologies. Rosatom cooperates with these universities to create opportunities for training Rosatom partner-countries’ academics. “This is a great opportunity for scientists and engineers based specifically in sub-Saharan Africa, as well as for the recent matriculants in the region who made progress in mathematics and sciences, and want to apply for nuclear specialties,” noted Shornikov. Interested parties are invited to visit www.russia.study and fill in an application form. The deadline for the first round of applications closes on February 15.