Rail transport companies Alstom and Eversholt Rail have unveiled the design of a new hydrogen train for the UK market. The train, called Breeze, will be a conversion of the existing Class 321 trains, which reengineers some of the UK’s most reliable rolling stock, to create a clean train for the modern age, the companies said in a statement released on Monday. These trains could run across the UK as early as 2022, emitting only water and no harmful emissions.

The rolling stock conversion will be carried out by Alstom, working in partnership with Eversholt Rail and building on an established business relationship spanning over 15 years and across multiple rolling stock fleets. “This proven and reliable Class 321 is an excellent fit in terms of characteristics, fleet size and availability for conversion to a hydrogen multiple unit (HMU),” the statement said.

Alstom and Eversholt Rail are working closely with industry stakeholders to develop the business cases and evaluate detailed introduction plans for fleets of these trains and the associated fuelling infrastructure. Alstom and Eversholt Rail have also confirmed that their initial, comprehensive engineering study is now complete, and that the train design concept has been finalised. The technical solution defined is the first to allow a hydrogen train to fit within the standard UK loading gauge, and it will also create more space for passengers than the trains they are intended to replace.

The Alstom facility in Widnes will manage the conversion of the Breeze trains, creating high-quality engineering jobs in a new and emerging sector.

The news follows the introduction in September of Alstom’s Coradia iLint hydrogen trains in Germany, where the trains now operate in regular passenger service on a daily basis. “Hydrogen train technology is an exciting innovation which has the potential to transform our railway, making journeys cleaner and greener by cutting carbon dioxide emissions even further. We are working with industry to establish how hydrogen trains can play an important part in the future, delivering better services on rural and inter-urban routes,” said UK Rail Minister Andrew Jones.

He elaborates that the new hydrogen powered train, which will only emit water, is proof of the UK’s continued creativity to transform the way people travel as the country continues to move to a greener, cleaner economy. “The UK is on track when it comes to growing a world-leading hydrogen economy and, through our modern Industrial Strategy, we are providing £23-million to power our ambition to be the ‘go-to’ place for first-class hydrogen transport,” said UK Minister for Energy and Clean Growth Claire Perry.

“The Breeze will be a clean new train for the UK with a stylish, modern look. The railways need to decarbonise and the government has rightly set out a goal to eliminate diesel rolling stock by 2040. “Hydrogen trains offer an ideal solution for routes which are unlikely to benefit from electrification, and our innovative engineering solution means they can now fit within the UK loading gauge and can quickly be ready to roll on Britain’s railways,” Alstom UK and Ireland MD Nick Crossfield commented. He added that, in Germany, Alstom’s hydrogen trains are already transporting passengers in the comfort and quiet that is characteristic of these trains. “The Breeze offers British rail users the opportunity to share in the pleasure that is a journey on a hydrogen train”. According to Evershold Rail client relations director Stephen Timothy, Eversholt Rail has an enviable record of innovation across its rolling stock portfolio. “Combining the experience gained from the successful Coradia iLint and Class 321 Renatus programmes will deliver a hydrogen-powered multiple unit product that will meet sponsors’ and train operators’ aspirations for the earliest possible fleet introduction,” he said.