Vehicle tracking and telematics provider, Ctrack, has launched its BX500 and BX600 range of wireless, ultra-compact GPS tracking devices. The company says these devices are ideal for use in cars, trucks and motorbikes, such as delivery bikes, quads, golf carts, delivery vans and generators. The new devices are also designed to track non-powered assets like containers, trailers and packages. Being small in size, both BX models can easily be concealed in cargo. Both also have small enough memory to record 25 000 trips. Featuring adaptive tracking, these devices make use of accelerometers, as well as data from GPS transmitters, to intelligently detect movements and send live updates. Either model can be scaled to provide continuous tracking information, or just once a day, in order to preserve internal battery life. The BX500 model is powered by removable lithium batteries, which can last up to four years when providing a single, daily tracking update. With an internal battery pack, the BX600 model can be recharged using the provided micro-USB cable and compact charger. Several BX600 units were recently used to monitor the progress of solar-powered cars in the 2018 Sasol Solar Challenge. Each device recorded an average of 96 hours of driving time, having been charged once before the event started. The BX600 model is also equipped to detect tampering, making it suitable for high-value cargo applications. Both tracking devices are enclosed in rugged housings that are made from acrylonitrile butadiene styrene or polycarbonate plastics. Ctrack’s BX units can be remotely configured and updated over the air and, using a single micro-sim, can be configured to roam across multiple 2G, 3G or 4G networks in South Africa. When dealing directly with Ctrack, costs for the BX500 unit start at R1 800 payable immediately, VAT excluded, with a monthly fee of R59, also excluding VAT, or R399 payable immediately, with a monthly fee of R105. The costs for the BX600 unit start at R2 100 payable immediately, VAT excluded, with a monthly fee of R59, also excluding VAT, or R399 payable immediately, with a monthly fee of R115. Contracts run for three years, with a yearly escalation of 10%.