From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Agricultural equipment manufacturer John Deere has evolved from supplying ploughs more than two centuries ago, to farmers being able to control their whole fleet through an app. Marleny Arnoldi tells us more about precision farming. Marleny Arnoldi: In a volatile South African economy, consumers have become price conscious and, at the same time, aware of how technology can enable cost savings. Commercial farmers have become fewer, but bigger, with help from technology. Farmer Hardu Prinsloo has an 8000 ha farm in Delmas, where he grows maize, soy beans, potatoes and wheat. He uses precision farming equipment across all his operations, from grass cutting and bailing, to ploughing and planting, as well as crop spraying, fertilizing and harvesting. Prinsloo tells us more about the benefits of precision farming. Farmer Hardu Prinsloo: Precision farming makes a big difference in terms of cost savings. We have done trials with equipment where the cost we incur to buy the equipment is recovered with one season’s diesel use that is saved, compared to what the diesel consumption would have been, using traditional equipment. Precision farming enables analysis and modifications that ultimately improves yield. It also allows fertilizer to be dispensed as necessary, whereas traditionally fertilizer would have been sprayed over the whole field, whether there is a need or not. Precision farming also allows savings on seeds, because the technology can measure where optimal growth conditions are. Precision farming has helped us to improve costs across the farming operation. Marleny Arnoldi: Precision farming has been around in South Africa since 1998, which is not that long ago. Prinsloo says he cannot imagine not using precision technology on his operations, it has become vital for commercial farmers to achieve the best possible yield, with the lowest amount of input cost, to remain competitive. Precision farming enables improved yield by analysing water levels, ground nutrient levels and adjusting equipment to react accordingly. Prinsloo shares his perception around precision farming and the necessity thereof in a modern society. Farmer Hardu Prinsloo: In earlier years, when I started out with precision farming, the equipment was still fairly simple and with basic functions and over time it has become more sophisticated. During that time, peoples’ perception have changed, everyone realizes the value thereof and I cannot imagine working without it. I cannot imagine any commercial farmer working without it. Precision farming has made our work so comfortable, more productive and cost-saving, that no farm would be competitive and sustainable without it. Marleny Arnoldi: To back up this equipment with proper advice, servicing and maintenance, John Deere and its affiliate supplier and service provider Afgri’s technicians provide remote service advice. The technicians are able to perform diagnostics on a machine, without driving out to the farm to determine a problem. However, this does not come without its challenges, since farms are often in remote areas where signal is scarce. Afgri precision agriculture specialist Shaun Schwartz tells us more what the company does to overcome the challenge. Afgri precision agriculture specialist Shaun Schwartz: Marleny Arnoldi: Schwartz has worked with precision farming technology for more than 10 years and explains that the technology started out with tracking and has evolved to incorporating an operations centre. John Deere’s operation centre is able to gather data from farming equipment and issue warnings of equipment failure or service reminders to farmers before they themselves become aware of it. Schwartz shares how precision tech has evolved for him. Afgri precision agriculture specialist Shaun Schwartz: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.