The City of Cape Town in partnership with the department of science and technology (DST) is set to host the inaugural Africa Tech Week that will introduce African small businesses to digital solutions and future business strategies and development. Africa Tech Week, under the theme “How to create a world-class culture of innovation to dominate your industry” will see hundreds of experienced global developers, tech recruiting firms, major investors and start-ups from across Africa and the world gathered in Cape Town in March, to among other issues, discuss and  show how Africa is transforming the world. According to the organisers, the conference, which will be speaking to start-ups, small and medium-sized enterprises, business organisations, national and regional entities focused on digital disruption, is set to become the largest annual tech conference in Africa. The conference will offer deep actionable insight and actual solutions for tangible business strategy in response to the Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0) by introducing Africa to exponential thinking, the disruptive mindset needed to develop the culture that enterprises need to get on the winning side of digital disruption. Africa Tech Week and Topco Media chief executive, Ralf Fletcher said: “What worked before is facing ultimate challenges and will not work in the future, organisations can either struggle and fail or adapt and thrive. “Digital disruption does not have to be a phenomenon that happens to us, where Africa is simply an observer. This significant moment in human history is an opportunity for African organisations to embrace, harness and utilise digital disruption in a considered strategic manner, and take advantage of technology to innovate and create solutions that drive positive and inclusive change.” City of Cape Town Mayoral Committee member for corporate services, Councillor Raelene Arendse said: “The City of Cape Town is pleased to align with Africa Tech Week in growing the city’s reputation as a world-class global tech centre. Our quality of life and strong supportive industry, including award-winning animation studios, attract the right talent. Cape Town is proud to be the digi-tech hub of Africa and a leading location for technology start-ups and venture capital deals.”