Brand South Africa together with Absa Bank on Thursday hosted a South Africa investment seminar at the World Economic Forum (WEF) in Switzerland to support and initiate the next phase of the country’s investment drive. The Seminar held on the margins of the 48th annual meeting of the WEF currently underway in Davos sought to showcase successes of the inaugural Investment Conference held in October last year, which was hosted by South Africa’s President Cyril Ramaphosa. BrandSA board chairperson, Khanyisile Kweyama said the prevailing global and domestic economic climate provided South Africa with the opportunity to communicate the benefits of the country’s participation at WEF and the positive outcomes achieved. “South Africa is on a winning trajectory and the world narrative that its new leadership has a business mindset and celebrates entrepreneurship is one which premised the innovative path of economic renewal and growth,” said Kweyama in a statement. The South African government and business delegation utilised the platform as an opportunity to communicate on the reforms government have initiated to improve ease of doing business, and to enhance the Nation Brand’s profile as an investment partner of choice. Led by Ramaphosa, Team South Africa’s core message at WEF this week, was that the country’s improved ease of doing business through initiatives such as InvestSA, and its diversified economy provided the basis for sustained growth and returns on invested capital. The SA Investment Seminar provided the opportunity for potential investors to hear from, and engage with the South African government and business representatives on its progress towards political and economic renewal, strengthening the credibility of public institutions and unlocking the latent potential and innovative spirit of South Africa’s economy. “The seminar gave Team South Africa the opportunity to show the progress made against the commitments made to investors and partners a year ago. These are the pathway to inclusive growth, land reform, employment through the Jobs Summit and the acceleration of efforts against corruption. We showed that we are building momentum in support of South Africa’s investment case,” said Absa chief executive, Maria Ramos.