Having determined the procurement of 1 064 diesel and electric locomotives to be “irregular and unlawful”, Transnet has communicated its intention to review contacts awarded to four original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) in 2015. The State-owned freight logistics group has also indicated that it will seek to recoup those portions of the contracts that had been inflated as a direct result of corrupt activities at the company, which chairperson Dr Popo Molefe said had been captured, until recently, by a group of “professional thieves”. The new board, appointed in May last year, became particularly uncomfortable with the rise in the price tag from R38.6-billion to R52-billion, as well as the role played by an intermediary firm, with links to the Gupta family, which is alleged to have pocketed as much as R5.3-million for each R50-million locomotive supplied by one of the OEMs, China South Rail (CSR). Molefe reported that Transnet would enter into talks with the four suppliers as early as this month in a bid to secure “just and equitable” settlements aligned with the group’s revised locomotive requirements. Transnet currently calculates that requirement to be 953 locomotives by 2025, instead of the 1 064 locomotives that were initially earmarked to enter Transnet Freight Rail’s network by 2017 – a schedule that was subsequently revised, partly as a result of lower-than-expected demand and partly to accommodate the relocation of assembly by two OEMs to Durban. Molefe stressed that it would be premature to provide details on what Transnet would deem to be a fair settlement, but confirmed that it was likely to involve a reduction in the number of locomotives eventually delivered to Transnet Freight Rail (TFR). He also hinted to penalties for late delivery and a lack of adherence to localisation. The contracts were unlikely to be cancelled outright, as was the case at the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (PRASA), where Molefe presided over a board-led process to tackle corruption at the company prior to being appointed chairperson of Transnet in May last year. Under Molefe’s stewardship, the PRASA board took legal action to set aside the R2.6-billion deal with Swifambo Rail Leasing for locomotives supplied by Spanish locomotive manufacturer Vossloh and which were found to be too tall to operate on parts of South Africa’s network. The four Transnet contracts were awarded to four separate OEMs in 2015, namely: General Electric (GE), to supply 233 diesel locomotives; China North Rail (CNR), which was contracted to supply 232 diesel locomotives; CSR, for 359 electric locomotives and Bombardier Transportation (BT), for 240 electric locomotives. By the end of the 2018 calendar year, GE had delivered all 233 locomotives and CSR had delivered 208 electric locomotives, CNR and BT had delivered 21 and 25 locomotives respectively. A further 49 locomotives are deemed to be work in progress, some 417 short of Transnet’s new requirement for 953 locomotives.