Global Manufacturing and Industrialisation Summit (GMIS) organising committee MD Namir Hourani says the manufacturing sector is key to the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR). Speaking to Engineering News Online on the sidelines of GMIS, in Pretoria, on Tuesday, he explained that the sector – which employs more than 500-million people globally and is one of the largest contributors to global gross domestic product – had been known to be a driver of economic regeneration. There is no economy in the world that has reached an advanced level of prosperity without an advanced industrial sector, he stated. He said that with all the changes happening within the manufacturing sector, and with the 4IR impacting on the sector, a platform like GMIS was needed to allow industry participants to seek solutions to various changes and challenges. During Hourani’s keynote presentation on Tuesday morning, he told delegates that manufacturing was not just disruptive, but explained that it also influenced government, economic policies and strategies. He told Engineering News Online that, as a driver of change, the sector helped to reduce poverty and crime levels through job creation. In South Africa, where crime is rife, the manufacturing sector could ultimately “make the economy prosper”. However, coupled with the massive opportunities brought about by the sector, Hourani lamented that the sector also came with its own set of challenges within the 4IR context – job losses, demand for new skills and policy changes. While 4IR resulted in greater interconnectedness and ease of doing business, he added that this expanded the playground for digital threats, such as hackers, that would need to be addressed. If your manufacturing plant network is not secure, the system can potentially be hacked, he stated. “Cybersecurity is a risk and how to mitigate this is challenging, but it’s also about security and collaboration between government and the private sector,” he pointed out, adding that startup companies were usually big drivers of security. When it comes to technology, Hourani proposed that startups be consulted in the process to mitigate against cyber and technological threats. “There isn’t a single solution, but companies should be investing in cybersecurity if they want an interconnected platform and organisation,” he tolds Engineering News Online. Further, while it was easier to cite economic prosperity as a measure of success, through looking at the dollar value or numbers, Hourani emphasised that it took time before the economic value and benefits of new technologies were realised. “There is a lot of work and preparation that needs to take place, which in some cases takes years,” he said, suggesting that, while things may look dire right now, patience might just be the key to realising a country’s economic prosperity.