Property developer and investor Atterbury has completed the development of the R340-million Bo’Valon Mall, in Mahebourg, Mauritius. The mall is a joint venture (JV) between Atterbury and EnAtt and takes its name from the village it is located in in, Beau Valon, which means “beautiful valley”. The year-long construction project has created a shopping centre with 10 500 m2 of gross lettable area, which brings convenient shopping to the south of Mauritius in a mall that “stands proud with the very best the island has to offer,” Atterbury states. The development was delivered on schedule and opened its doors on November 21 with its official inauguration ceremony held on November 27. Attracting strong leasing demand, the Bo’Valon opened fully let with nearly 50 shops, restaurants and services, with anchor tenants such as Kingsavers and Espace Maison, and supported by fashion brands such as GoSports, Vesti One, Quicksilver and City Sports, besides others. The mall’s food court adds a vibrant social element and houses well-known South African brands such as Spur and Panarottis. It also features a fun children’s play area. The first-class retail mall enjoys an easily accessible location from the roads servicing Mahebourg and Blue Bay, and offers ample on-grade parking for customers. Atterbury developing manager Pieter Olivier says the mall is “unlike anything the area has seen before”, adding that, apart from the shopping convenience, variety and leisure options it offers under one roof, he believes the mall “has turned out exceptionally well”. He adds that “this is a facility the local shoppers can be very proud of”, in the sense that the development has been “an immensely positive experience”, with Bo’Valon Mall having been welcomed by Mahebourg locals, who are “delighted to have one of the best shopping destinations on the island.” The build-up to the mall’s opening saw the community getting involved in an event called ‘Laiss to Trace’ where children made hand imprints in a strip of concrete next to the mall. The mall’s opening day featured one of Mauritius’s most popular artists, Zulu, performing an original song especially written for the occasion. The development of Bo’Valon continues Atterbury’s ongoing investment and confidence in Mauritius where it has established a formidable presence and record, including the development of the landmark Bagatelle Mall of Mauritius.