University of Edinburgh Global Health Academy co-director Professor Francisca Mutapi has stressed the importance of Africa taking the lead in scientific research and innovation programmes in, and concerning, the continent. She was delivering the keynote address at the fifth Science Forum South Africa, in Pretoria, on Wednesday. She pointed out that Africa’s aspirations for science, technology and innovation were clearly articulated in the continent’s Agenda 2063. This was aimed at achieving a prosperous continent, with the resources to drive its own development, and enjoying a high standard of living and a good quality of health. “I am pleased that Africa is driving its science, technology and innovation agenda,” she said. She highlighted the role that African researchers, living and working outside the continent, were playing in addressing Africa’s challenges. Africans in the diaspora did not represent a ‘brain drain’ but a ‘brain gain’. “We need to build effective sustainable research partnerships,” with international partners, she observed. International donors were increasingly appreciative of African-led research initiatives. One such initiative was Tackling Infections to Benefit Africa (Tiba – which also means ‘to cure an infection” in Swahili). Funded by the UK, this involved the University of Edinburgh working in partnerships with African researchers, mainly in Eastern and Southern Africa. While the British provided money, the African partners made contributions in kind. Both sides provided researchers. (Mutapi is a deputy director of Tiba.) “Of course, it would help if Africa had its own money,” she pointed out. Foreign direct investment was important, but could be fickle and risk-averse. She praised South Africa for its research and development spending. Last year, the country’s gross expenditure on research and development amounted to 0.68% of its gross domestic product. This was significantly higher than the average for Africa. The continent needed to maintain and expand its research infrastructure, which was currently inadequate. There was a need for well-maintained and well-equipped African centres of excellence. But, even so, Mutapi stated that, when she saw what was happening in Africa in terms of research, development and innovation, she was very happy with what was going on.