A week after the launch of the National Water and Sanitation Master Plan, the Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS) has announced plans to start implementing several measures to help mitigate the persistent drought in South Africa. Addressing the media on Tuesday, Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu said that, with almost immediate effect, drought operating rules will be instituted. Further, the department will undertake borehole drilling and borehole rehabilitation, water harvesting, ensuring the protection and use of springs, cloud seeding, effluent treatment and the establishment of water tanker services. The DWS will also facilitate the start of long-term initiatives, including projects such as water storage and transfer; water infrastructure, including dams and pipelines; the review and promulgation of restrictions within legislation to restore and protect ecological infrastructure; and the development, integration and optimisation of other water sources, including groundwater and desalination in the coastal areas. The department will also relaunch the yearly Blue and Green Drop monitoring programmes from February 1, 2020. However, while the initiatives will assist in mitigating the drought, demand also needs to be reduced to ensure sustainable water security. The department has set its sights on reducing South Africa's excessive water use from about 233 ℓ/d per capita to about 175 ℓ/d per capita. This will better align with the global benchmark of about 180 ℓ/d per capita. "South Africa has higher water consumption per capita than the world average, and yet we still continue to use water irresponsibly," the Minister said. Consumers will have to change their water consumption behaviour in order to reduce demand and ensure the sustainability of the country's water resources. The DWS also intends on increasing supply for a growing population and economy to ensure water security by 2030, in line with the National Development Plan, Sisulu noted.