From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: African-focused metals producer Pan African Resources’ Elikhulu operation, which is located in Evander, Mpumalanga is achieving a better-than-expected production performance, investors and media were told during a site visit last month. Nadine James tells us more. Nadine James: The R1.74-billion Elikhulu project is the second of Pan African’s retreatment projects with the R325-million Barberton Tailings Retreatment Project producing more than 17 000 oz of gold last year. The project started producing in September 2018 and uses a conventional carbon-in-leach circuit with a proprietary pre-oxidation process. It delivered in excess of 15 000 oz of gold in its first four months of operation. Given the project’s relative success, management saw fit to increase its output. Elikhulu operations manager Oriel Shikwambana explains. Elikhulu operations manager Oriel Shikwambana: Nadine James: The commissioning of the final tank is scheduled for the end of February. This expansion, combined with tweaks to improve the recovery process, should see Elikhulu delivering 70 000 oz of gold in its first full year of production. Meanwhile, the completion of Phase 1B of the new tailings storage facility is expected to be completed by April. Shikwambana points out that the retreatment of the three existing slimes dams, Kinross, Leslie/Bracken and Wikkelhaak, will result in the residues being re-deposed to a single tailings storage facility site, which will reduce Pan African’s ecological footprint. Elikhulu operations manager Oriel Shikwambana: Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines: South32’s South Africa Energy Coal expresses concern about Eskom’s fragile state Mining and metals company South32 says it is concerned about the challenges that have increasingly threatened the stability of South African power utility Eskom and needs to ensure the continuity of supply of its coal to Eskom in the long run. South32 COO Mike Fraser:  Sashnee Moodley:  That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.