Energy Partners Water (EP Water), a division of Energy Partners and part of the PSG Group, this week announced that it had acquired water purification specialist, Venus Water Treatment. In a statement issued on Monday, EP Water divisional head Andre Agenbag explained that the merger of the two companies would add significant manufacturing and project execution capability to EP Water’s portfolio. “EP Water has been operating for just over two years now and we have been involved in a number of local and international projects, including consulting work for one of Saudi Arabia’s largest water purification plants. To date, we have outsourced manufacturing and construction to third parties such as Venus Water.” He added that, in keeping with EP Water’s vision to provide end-to-end solutions, incorporating manufacturing into the division’s in-house services was the logical next step. “This allows us to provide clients with a secure and cost effective water supply in a simple and efficient manner. “We have seen considerable interest from Energy Partners’ existing clients, as well as potential clients, in water supply and purification solutions. As people become more aware of the increasing cost of water – and the potential business impact should the supply be interrupted – more and more business owners are investing in offgrid water supply systems.” With the capabilities acquired from Venus Water, EP Water expects to be better placed to provide containerised water plants that are designed to client specifications and that are easy to deploy on site. Venus Water’s existing client base is, meanwhile, expected to benefit from the outsourced service model that Energy Partners has refined throughout all of its divisions. This means that clients may enter into a water treatment agreement with Energy Partners and pay only for the water they use, without needing to invest any upfront capital to acquire treatment equipment. Venus Water CEO and founder Philip van Schoor will stay on with the company and assist with the integration over the coming months. “Philip brings a wealth of experience to the team, having been active in the water sector for over 45 years. We are thrilled to be able to add his skillset to our division,” Agenbag said. “This is an exciting new chapter for Venus Water and we look forward to providing our current client base with more options and services. This merger also opens up a host of new opportunities for the team which we have built over the years to apply their considerable skills to new and larger projects,” Van Schoor said. The next step, according to Agenbag, will be to ensure effective integration of the new team into EP Water’s operation. “The water sector is about to see significant growth over the coming years and EP Water is, therefore, ramping up its capabilities to meet this demand.”