Construction of the first of three inshore patrol vessels (IPVs) for the South African Navy (SAN) formally started with a keel-laying ceremony at Damen Shipyards Cape Town (DSCT) on Saturday. The small ships are being acquired under the SAN’s Project Biro. This, first, IPV is expected to be finished in early 2021 and enter service in the middle of that year. The second should be delivered in 2022 and the third in 2023. “The event today signifies the start of the building of Project Biro,” highlighted DSCT director Sam Montsi. “Over the years, our shipyard has undertaken many projects for local and international clients but none as significant as project Biro. This project is being built and delivered within the agreed specifications, timelines and budgets.” “With the building of the patrol vessels, we are demonstrating that we are truly an industrial powerhouse and most importantly, highlighting that the South African Defence Industry has the requisite capabilities and capacity, and that government spending has a positive socioeconomic spin off on our society at large,” affirmed Defence and Military Veterans Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula. She said that the new IPVs would be the workhorses of the fleet, reducing the pressure on the SAN’s frigate squadron. “The [Damen] Group is immensely encouraged by the award of Project Biro to Damen Shipyards Cape Town,” stated Group chief commercial officer Arnout Damen. “The Group stands by the shipyard and will work with the local teams including [defence acquisition agency] Armscor and the South African Navy to ensure that Biro is built and delivered successfully on time. It is our intention that at the end of Project Biro we should have achieved significant transfer of technologies and skills, as well as facilitated growth of enterprises as envisioned in these imperatives.” Each IPV will have an overall length of 62.2 m, a beam (width) of 11 m and be able to achieve a maximum speed of 20 knots (37 km/h). Each vessel will have a crew of 40 and be able to embark another 22 personnel. The programme employs 250 DSCT workers and  supports more than 1 000 jobs in local industry. The local content requirement is 60% but Damen is seeking to exceed that.