Ford’s Silverton vehicle assembly plant in Pretoria has started production of the refreshed 2019 Ford Ranger. “Following the investment of over R3-billion in our local operations and extensive upgrades to our plants over the past 18 months, we are delighted to see the first of the new Ford Ranger models coming off our production line,” says Ford Motor Company sub-Saharan Africa region MD Neale Hill. “This is an extremely important and exciting year for the Ford Ranger, which will also see the launch of the first-ever Ranger Raptor – undoubtedly one of this year’s most highly anticipated new models,” he adds. “The 2019 Ford Ranger will deliver more power, greater fuel efficiency, enhanced refinement and even more advanced technologies when it goes on sale in the coming months, and we are confident it will once again set the benchmark in the extremely competitive pickup segment.” Selected range-topping models, including the Ranger Raptor, will be powered by the all-new 2.0 bi-turbo diesel engine assembled at spruced up Ford Struandale engine plant, in Port Elizabeth. This unit produces 157 kW of power and 500 Nm of torque – up by 10 kW and 30 Nm compared with the current 3.2-l TDCi engine. It also delivers an up to 9% improvement in fuel efficiency when combined with a new ten-speed automatic transmission. Other derivatives will feature a 2.0-l single turbo version of this engine, producing 132 kW of power and 420 Nm of torque, mated to the same ten-speed transmission. Various other models in the line-up will retain the current 2.2-l and 3.2-l Duratorq TDCi engines and existing gearbox options. As usual, the new Ranger line-up includes single cab, super cab and double cab body styles. Following the launch of the new Ford Ranger models, attention will shift to the locally assembled Ranger Raptor, which Ford believes will create a new segment in the pickup market. “There is a lot of excitement and hype around the Ranger Raptor, and this exhilarating new model will occupy a white space in the pickup market when it goes on sale in the second quarter of this year, creating the first-ever true performance model in this crucial segment,” notes Hill. “We can’t wait to get the Ranger Raptor to market, enabling our customers to experience unrivalled off-road performance, cutting-edge technologies and the most muscular design yet seen in this class.” Some of the defining features of the Ranger Raptor include position sensitive damping shock absorbers and an advanced terrain management system that includes a Baja mode for fast off-road driving. The vehicle will also sport a toughened reinforced chassis, all-disc braking system and specially developed BF Goodrich tyres.