Afgri Technology Services (ATS) has partnered with the University of Pretoria’s (UP’s) TuksNovation to foster innovation in the agricultural sector. TuksNovation is a nonprofit organisation founded by the university, in partnership with the departments of Trade and Industry and Small Business Development, that serves as a technology incubator and accelerator, providing specialised product and business development support to tech start-up companies. ATS was established by agribusiness Afgri Group to specifically focus on introducing innovation and technology across the agricultural value chain and bringing tech solutions to its customers. ATS has partnered with TuksNovation for its annual Activate Competition, which searches for cutting-edge and innovative technologies and start-ups that can be grown into successful businesses. “The objective of the competition is to identify potentially profitable technologies and disruptive start-ups for virtual incubation and acceleration, with the intention of building the agricultural sector’s innovation capacity and to foster support for and growth of South Africa’s entrepreneurs,” said ATS MD Niki Neumann in a release. The competition is open primarily to UP and Gordon Institute of Business Science students, as well as academic staff and alumni. “ATS will be actively participating in the competition by helping to validate entry concepts and providing a degree of mentoring to relevant start-ups in the fintech, foodtech and agtech spaces.” She added that the partnership with TuksNovation, provided the company access to a pipeline of top technology start-ups to partner with, and allowed ATS to take another step forward in supporting the entrepreneurial and small and medium enterprise innovation community in South Africa. The partnership fully supports ATS’s desire to advance the development and implementation of agricultural technology solutions that will help drive the future of agriculture and enable food security. “By supporting TuksNovation, we further our vision of bringing together the greatest minds, technology and products to be the catalyst of innovation and technology-enabled solutions to drive sustainable agricultural growth across the African and global agricultural value chains.” Entries for the Activate Competition will be open until March 22.