South African defence and aerospace company Paramount Group has secured a contract with the United Arab Emirates (UAE) for its next generation armoured personnel carrier – Mbombe 4, which was unveiled at defence and security expo IDEX 2019, being held in the Middle East this week. Manufactured in South Africa, the Mbombe 4, represents the “pinnacle” of land systems technologies and is drawing on Paramount’s and South Africa’s “exceptional” heritage as leaders in the field of armoured vehicle design, the company stated. The Mbombe 4 x 4 completes the Mbombe family of combat vehicles – which also comprises the Mbombe 8 x 8 and the Mbombe 6 x 6 – and is reportedly designed to “optimally” meet the increasing demand for exceptional protection and versatility for modern conflicts, such as counter terrorism and peacekeeping missions. “The new Mbombe 4 is a showcase of South Africa’s ability to create world-class technologies, ground-breaking innovations and the country’s ‘can-do’ attitude. This product also demonstrates our quest for continuous innovation and pushing the boundaries of vehicle design, crew protection and interoperability,” Paramount founder and executive chairperson Ivor Ichikowitz said in a release issued on Tuesday. “With the launch of the new Mbombe 4, Paramount is able to offer its customers one of the most complete land systems ranges in the world. Our partner governments are now able to deploy the most advanced, latest-generation 4 x 4, 6 x 6 and 8 x 8 vehicles with a single common logistics train, highly-competitive acquisition costs and the lowest through-life cycle operating costs,” he added. Ichikowitz noted that the platform offers “very high levels” of ballistic and mine protection and that other key features include a burst speed of 140 km/h and a unique rear-door ramp design. The vehicle is also able to withstand temperatures ranging from -20 °C to 55 °C. The Mbombe 4 has a unique onboard mission computer and interface system. The vehicle is also fitted with the latest generation navigational, crew comfort and security systems, with examples including a driver-assist camera system, “winterisation kit”, vehicle location and tracking systems, a North Atlantic Treaty Organisation standard tow-hitch, radios and intercom systems and a central tyre inflation system.