Supermarket chain Pick n Pay is trialling a R5 reusable bag made from green plastic bottles, as an affordable alternative to plastic carrier bags. The bag is the first of its kind and will be initially introduced to 22 stores across the country to gauge customer reaction. Pick n Pay was the first retailer to introduce a reusable bag in 2003 and has since offered customers a range of alternatives, including cotton and recycled polyethylene terephthalate bags. “More recently we’ve trialled new alternatives, such as paper bags and cardboard boxes. But the reality is that, for the time being, the plastic carrier bag remains the most economical bag option for customers – despite the growing options available. “We believe our new R5 reusable bag could be a viable reusable bag option for many more customers, across all income groups,” says Pick n Pay transformation director Suzanne Ackerman-Berman. In addition, the supermarket chain has also started a trial with a reusable netted fruit and vegetable fresh produce bag, to be sold for R7.50, in an effort to further discourage unnecessary plastic bag usage. Launched in five stores across the Western Cape at the end of December, overwhelmingly positive feedback from customers will see the retailer expand the trial to include more stores across the region, namely the Durban North Hypermarket and five stores in Namibia by mid-February. Customers can also bring their own transparent and sealable reusable bags in-store for loose selling produce. “We know there are many considerations, such as size, durability and price, so we are working closely with our customers to trial various options. We believe that by following this process, we can drive real, long-term sustainable change, both for our environment and our customers,” notes Ackerman-Berman. The stores stocking the R5 reusable bag include Embalenhle, Mayfield Square, Carletonville Gold Reef Mall, Kroonstad, Festival Mall, Three Rivers, Hyper South Coast, Scottburgh, Waterfall Mall, Lephalale, Ottery Hyper, Baywest, Sinoville, Irene Village Mall, The Grove, I'Langa Mall, Somerset Mall, Melkbos Strand, Gardens, Tygervalley, Constantia and V&A Waterfront.