The Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS) has assured South Africans that the country will not run out of water during the dry winter spell, but warns that the sustainability of the water may be compromised if consumers use water negligently. It, therefore, encourages consumers to adopt water-saving habits. South Africa had 23 209 m3 of water available out of its storage capacity of 32 321 m3, the department revealed on Thursday. Winter rainfall in the Western Cape had boosted South Africa’s water capacity, with the dam levels in the province having reached 50% in the last two weeks. More rain is expected in the next three months. The Free State’s dam levels are at about 86% and Gauteng’s dams 94.4%. Meanwhile, the DWS continues to intervene in the water situation in Makhanda, in the Eastern Cape, that has been affected by acute water shortages in the past months. The department is refurbishing the James Kleynhans water treatment plant that supplies water to Makhanda, with completion scheduled for June 2021. The weekly report shows that Bonkolo dam in Eastern Cape does not have a drop of water, while the Xilinxa dam is left with a mere 12.7%. However, all is not gloomy as Laing dam recorded 100.5% while the Umtata, Ntenetyana and Belfort dams have reached their capacity and beyond. The Klerkskraal and Potchefstroom dams in the North West, meanwhile, are at full capacity at 102.4% and 100.8%, respectively, but the situation remains dire in regions such as Madibeng, Ngaka Modiri and Madibogo. In KwaZulu-Natal, there is not a single dam that has recorded 100% capacity but the water situation is satisfactory, with the Midmar dam in the Natal Midlands at 98.9% capacity, while Spioenkop in the Giants Castle is almost full at 99%. The average dam level in the province is 63.3%. The DWS stated that Limpopo had only four full dams, while the Mopani region was battling to keep decent water levels. Giyani, Tzaneen and Phalaborwa continued to scrape the surface for water as residents almost completely rely on groundwater for survival. The situation is having a negative impact on the citrus industry in Mopani. In Mpumalanga, it is feared that the dry conditions in the Sabie and Crocodile rivers that run through the Kruger National Park may affect wildlife in the Lowveld.