State-owned national flag carrier South African Airways (SAA) announced on Sunday that it had leased latest-generation Airbus A350-900 aircraft to operate its Johannesburg-New York route. The new, twin-engined, aircraft will replace the four-engined older generation Airbus A340-600 airliners currently used on the route. The wording of the statement implied more than one A350 was being leased (more than one would be needed to ensure constant operation of the route), but SAA did not specify the number it was getting. The lease period is for up to three years. “The introduction of these state-or-the-art aircraft to our fleet is an important step-change as we continue to make progress to transform our business and return the airline to financial sustainability in the shortest time possible,” affirmed acting SAA CEO Zukisa Ramasia. “These aircraft present an immediate opportunity to offer an improved product between Johannesburg and New York which will be accompanied by unmatched and consistent customer experience for both Business and Economy Class customers.” SAA’s A350s will be delivered during this, second, half of the year. They will be fitted with lie-flat beds in Business Class and have 246 seats in Economy Class. The first six rows of Economy Class will have extra legroom. The new aircraft will cut the airline’s fuel expenditure by about 20%, in comparison to the A340s currently used on the route. The result will be significant cost-savings for SAA and so help improve its operating costs and financial situation. The airline’s carbon emissions will also be reduced. “The Airbus A350-900 is the world’s premier aircraft and offers the highest levels of customer and crew comfort combined with excellent economics for ultra-long-haul flights,” enthused SAA in its press release. “The A350 has the latest offering in safety, maintenance and efficiency (technology).” “We are proud to offer our customers the latest generation aircraft with a modern product, including quieter cabin, a more relaxing environment during flight, and the latest in-flight entertainment.” said Ramasia. The Johannesburg-New York will continue to be a non-stop flight.