Mediclinic has started operating from new medical facilities in Stellenbosch, purpose-built for the private hospital group by Atterbury and its partners to serve the growing burden of care in for the Winelands community. South African property developer and investor Atterbury began the development in May 2017 and delivered the new 16 000 m2 hospital in March. The hospital began operating from its new home from June 1. The hospital is conveniently located for the community, just off the R44 Strand road, at the corner of Elsie du Toit drive, in Brandwacht. The bigger private hospital responds to growing demand in this community, with residents of Stellenbosch and the surrounding Winelands areas no longer having to travel long distances to access specialist medical services. The hospital has over 100 beds, a 24-hour emergency centre, five theatres, a coffee shop and a pharmacy. Its departments cover general surgery, medical patients, ophthalmology, urology, an intensive care unit, general theatres and radiology, as well as a day clinic. Its second phase, due for completion at the end of July, includes gynaecology, maternity, paediatrics and obstetrics. In addition, the old Mediclinic building in Stellenbosch, located in Die Boord, remains operational for orthopaedic, rheumatology and day clinic services. The two Mediclinic facilities are operated as one. “We are ecstatic to have delivered a modern, sustainable healthcare facility that supports Mediclinic in bringing even more of the best available care to this community for years to come,” commented Atterbury Western Cape development manager Gerrit van den Berg. The eco-friendly building was designed by TV3 Architects and Townplanners to inspire wellness. It benefits from plentiful natural light and is water efficient owing to a grey water system, water harvesting and its drought-resistant gardens require minimal irrigation. Besides the hospital’s facilities having been developed to Mediclinic’s specifications, its design and décor features reflect its location in Stellenbosch, and restorative views of the town are revealed through its windows.