Work on the busy Bosmansdam road around the Century City precinct is continuing, with the City of Cape Town announcing on Tuesday that it will be contributing a further R20-million towards the rehabilitation of the existing road and extension of the cycle lane towards the N7 freeway. This contribution comes after the Century City developer in May 2018 invested about R40-million in the widening of the road which is a key link to the ever-expanding Century City precinct which houses retail, business and housing space. The funds, according to a statement by the City, came from the development contribution which is used to fund bulk infrastructure projects, as agreed with the City of Cape Town. Since then the road has been turned into a dual carriageway with the construction of two new lanes between Montague drive and Koeberg road. The dualling of Bosmansdam road has been completed and motorists are already enjoying a smooth driving experience along this section of the road. Some minor works, among which the installation of traffic lights, will be finalised in due course. The city said the project had a two-pronged focus which was to alleviate congestion and to support the developments taking place within and around Century City. The project took a year to complete after minor delays. "This stretch of Bosmansdam road carries a high volume of traffic to and from Century City and the Edgemead area. Thus, the widening is significantly improving peak-traffic flows for those living and working in the area. Thanks to the upgrade the safety of other road users like pedestrians has also been improved," City of Cape Town’s Mayoral Committee Member for Transport Felicity Purchase said. "This project epitomises excellence in service delivery as it was designed to meet motorists, cyclists as well as pedestrian needs. During construction the city kept the disruption to traffic flow to the minimum, while cyclists and pedestrians were accommodated via the provision of adequate signage, safe walkways, and access routes." Work on the extension of the cycle lane is to commence soon.