From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Global consulting firm Nihilent officially launched its first user experience laboratory on the African continent last month. The facility, located in Bryanston, is the second of its kind globally and was inaugurated by Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan. Nadine James has the story. Nadine James: Nihilent executive VP LC Singh explained that the lab uses a patented design thinking framework and analytical tools to identify cognitive and emotional triggers and compile consumer data based on nonverbal and verbal cues. He demonstrated the lab’s capability by showing media a global and integrated online art platform, which the Nihilent team designed for framers and photographers, based on customer experience. Nihilent executive VP LC Singh: Nadine James: The idea is that innovators and entrepreneurs will use the lab from conceptualisation through to the final testing phase, to ensure that the product or service is something that consumers want. Once a prototype is ready, Nihilent will conduct interviews on a sample size of the potential consumer base. Thereafter, based on the consumer data, the team will group similar answers and experiences into “personas” that are representative of the sample, factoring in similar demographics, such as age, level of education, wealth status and other variables. Nihilent executive VP LC Singh: Nadine James: The technology tracks eye movement and uses an electroencephalogram to monitor the electrical impulses of the frontal lobe, which, in part, regulates emotional response. It also uses machine learning and analytical tools to develop a range or band for specific emotions, such as happiness, sadness or neutrality, which can effectively monitor the degree to which customers react to specific stimuli and why. Gordhan noted that while the technology is intended for private sector use, he sees multiple government applications. Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan: Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines: Redefine maintains sustained growth, value creation despite difficult local climate Redefine Properties, which increased its distribution for the six months ended February 28 by 4% to 49.2c, maintained a strong platform for sustained growth and value creation despite ongoing economic and political uncertainty. Redefine CFO Leon Kok:  Sashnee Moodley:  That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.