Abland and Tiber, joint developers of the Sandton Gate precinct, are on track to complete Phase 1 of the mixed-use development. The first phase will include 15 500 m² of commercial space, 13 000 m² of P-grade office space and a 2 500 m² Planet Fitness positioned on the piazza level of the building. Confirmed tenants, which include Mimecast, will call Sandton Gate home as of November 1. “Due to the high demand following the launch of Phase 1, we aim to break ground for Phase 2 in 2020,” Abland marketing and leasing director Grant Silverman commented in a statement. “We’ve redesigned Phase 2 to include more retail offerings that will include a grocery store and pharmacy as anchor tenants, as well as a hotel and a holistic medical offering. Other amenities will include restaurants, coffee shops, salons and other convenience stores.” The residential component of the precinct, which will comprise 137 units of two- and three-bed penthouses, has launched and infrastructural work and the bulk earthworks have started. With the completion of residential first phase envisaged for the fourth quarter of 2020, the developers are aiming to hit their pre-sale target by August, meaning that construction of the top structure will begin in the fourth quarter of this year. “With every project of this size we could not ignore the need for road upgrades,” indicated Abland MD Jurgens Prinsloo. “Abland undertook extensive traffic impact assessments to get an idea of the traffic impact once the project is complete. As part of the infrastructural advancements, a new intersection on William Nicol between Mattie and Sandton drive is currently under way.” Moreover, there will be an introduction of additional lanes to ensure seamless access to the precinct and decrease potential congestion around the area. “Ultimately, there are seven substantial upgrades that we are doing ranging from the Peter Place intersection, Republic intersection, Mattie intersection, Sandton drive and William Nicol.” Phase 2 of the development will be ready for occupation by the first quarter of 2021.