Jiangling Motors South Africa (JMSA) has lifted the veil on its new one-ton-bakkie offering to the local market, the Vigus 5, as well as a new truck with a four-ton payload. JMSA is a subsidiary of China’s Jiangxi Jiangling Motors Import & Export (JMIE), which forms part of Jiangling Motors Corporation (JMC). JMSA sells three vehicle brands in South Africa, namely JMC, Changan and Landwind. The Vigus and Carrying Plus will be sold under the JMC brand. The Landwind brand focuses on sports-utility vehicles (SVUs) and the Changan on small workhorses, such a single-cab, double-cab and minivan vehicles. JMSA started in South Africa, ten years ago, with two models – the Boarding double-cab bakkie and a small truck, says JMSA GM James Chen. Today there are three brands, with a number of new models, and still more to come. Next year promises to be a big year for Changan, as the brand will see the launch of a seven-seater van, to be followed by the introduction of  a passenger car range that will include an SUV, he notes. The introduction of the new models will be supported by the continued roll-out of dealerships across South Africa. Currently at 25, ten new facilities will be added this year, and yet another ten in 2020, which should take the number of dealerships to 45 by the end of next year, says Chen. He adds that JMSA is not going to rush to build a local assembly plant in South Africa, but that it could be a possibility in “five to ten years’ time”. An assembled plant, used as a base for exports to the rest of Africa, will only make sense once sales in South Africa start to improve. Chen says JMC sales are at around 500 units year, but that 2 500 units may be possible in 2020, with the numbers spurred on by the new Vigus 5, and the forthcoming passenger-car range from Changan. Committed to SA
JMIE executive VP Liang Bo says the company is yet to show a profit in South Africa, but that it is patient, especially as JMSA launched in South Africa during the heights of the global financial crisis. He believes the company has the network to be successful in South Africa, but acknowledges that it requires more innovative products. It must be as good as Japanese products, but with a Chinese price tag, he notes. “We are embracing the start of our second decade in South Africa with the launch of two new models. “Looking forward, we’ll supply the products that South African people want, and not what Chinese people like.” JMC started vehicle production in 1968. It operates in joint venture with Ford and Isuzu in China. Carry the Load
The new Carrying Plus, with its 4-t payload, adds to the company’s 1.3-t to 2.8-t small truck range. The manual transmission truck has air-conditioning and antilock braking as standard. It is available as a cargo, tipper, drop-side or refrigerated unit. Maximum power output is 84 kW. Pricing starts at R286 990. The vehicle is sold with a five-year/150 000 km warranty, three-year/90 000 km service plan and 24-hour roadside assistance. The Vigus 5 bakkie replaces the previous JMC double-cab range, named Vigus. The manual transmission vehicle is available in 4 X 4 and 2 X 4 units. Maximum load capacity is 800 kg, with a towing capacity of 1.5 t. The 2.4 l Puma diesel engine delivers a max output of 103 kW. Pricing starts at R308 000. The vehicle is sold with a five-year/100 000 km warranty, five-year/60 000 km service plan and 24-hour roadside assistance. 