Daimler, parent company to Mercedes-Benz South Africa (MBSA), has announced that it will establish an information technology (IT) hub at its vehicle production plant in East London, in the Eastern Cape. The IT hub will focus on data analytics, software development and business analysis, and will work in collaboration with Mercedes-Benz Cars’ central IT operations to support the German manufacturer’s global production, supply chain and maintenance systems. The new IT hub will be one of three within Mercedes-Benz Cars’ IT operations. The other two IT hubs are responsible for IT engineering and quality solutions and are based in India and Spain, respectively. “MBSA has a vested interest in the growth and development of South Africa as a centre of excellence in information technology,” says MBSA IT senior manager Tom Cawood. “As a positive contributor to the economy of the East London region, the establishment of an IT hub provides us with an opportunity to create . . . additional new jobs locally and to continue writing our story of manufacturing excellence into the future. “This investment comes with increased opportunities in skills development, training, and jobs for local people. “We are incredibly proud that our ability to deliver world-class IT solutions is recognised by our principals in Daimler,” adds Cawood. “These include software solutions such as paperless manufacturing, including Internet-of-Things-connected devices, digital shopfloor management and artificial intelligence solutions. “We have proven our innovative spirit [and our] ability to deliver fast. Our software development is on the newest architecture platforms. We are ready for this new challenge.” A two-phased recruitment approach for the MBSA IT hub will result in the employment of 90 people over a period of two years and will consist of a mix of graduate and professional skills. Recruitment for the MBSA IT hub opened at the end of April. MBSA does not provide any investment value related to the IT hub. MBSA last year announced a R10-billion investment towards the expansion of East London plant for the production of the new generation C-Class.