Dual-listed real estate company EPP on Friday opened its flagship development in Warsaw – Galeria Młociny, which gives residents access to more than 200 stores alongside one of the city’s most ambitious food and beverage projects. Galeria Młociny features nearly 85 000 m2 of modern space featuring more than 6 000 m2 of restaurant and entertainment options. Gastronomy takes centre stage as the centre’s food hall is unique within Poland’s capital city, with several different zones to appeal to a range of different customers. There are cafes, street food trucks and outdoor dining options. In addition to a family zone with both indoor and outdoor play options for children, there are dedicated spaces for coworking adjacent to the food hall. The centre also features the first cinema in Warsaw with seats that fully recline. The ten-screen multiplex is the first of its kind in the district. The main hall within the centre, dubbed “fashion avenue” is designed to evoke the feeling of a high-street, something that is lacking in Poland. The shopfronts are nearly 8 m high with natural light. The upper floors of the complex feature terraces with playgrounds, green space and panoramic views. “Galeria Młociny is the largest project Echo Investment has developed so far,” said Echo Investment CEO Nicklas Lindberg. “When creating it, we used 20 years of experience in the retail, entertainment and gastronomy sector. We wanted Galeria Młociny to be a place that will attract people to Bielany; therefore, as much as 20% of its space was intended for meeting, entertainment and gastronomy.” The centre is located just next to the Młociny transport hub in one of the best transit locations in Warsaw, with easy access to the metro station, numerous tram lines and city, local and country bus lines, a bicycle station and a park and ride car park. It is the most important interchange for the northern part of the city and neighbouring towns, which is used by over 24-million passengers a year. Galeria Młociny's investors are EPP and Echo Investment. While the former will manage the newly opened complex, the latter is fully responsible for the development process and leasing.