French multinational energy management company Schneider Electric on Tuesday announced the introduction of a mySchneider Electrician Rewards Program for electricians. The company said the programme was aimed at rewarding residential and small building electricians for making “good choices” when they buy Schneider Electric products. “We want to encourage residential and small building electricians to make Schneider Electric their preferred partner of choice,” commented Schneider Electric Electricians Programme manager Miranda Puza. Electricians can claim their rewards each time they buy an applicable Schneider Electric product at any one of the company’s official distributors. Electricians will need to register on the mySchneider Partner Portal for electricians. Once registered, they can start submitting claims by selecting the ‘Upload Invoice’ tab, where they will need to enter the invoice number and date and upload the invoice file while ensuring part numbers are visible on all the invoices. Registered residential and small building electricians will receive mySchneider Electrician Rewards Program points for all approved claims submitted and points received are valid until the end of the second year. Electricians will be first in line for notifications of new product alerts, sales promotions and savings opportunities. “Not only will they be part of a professionally run rewards programme where they can track their progress and growth, they will have access via a direct channel to Schneider Electric from which to give feedback and be heard,” commented Puza. She added that, despite the programme being aimed at residential and small electricians, it also holds benefits for official distributors, as it is expected to drive an increase in traffic through their outlets from which they can solicit up-selling of other ancillary products. Introduced in November 2018, the mySchneider Partner Portal for electricians is an online source that offers products and energy management solutions, tools, training and networking opportunities. It aims to assist residential electricians grow their enterprises through business development training and serves as a network that provides access to information on the latest products and energy management solutions.