Rand Water on Wednesday implemented water restrictions to various areas across its network as demand heavily outstripped supply of 4 370 Ml/d. It warned that the prolonged average water consumption of 4 900 Ml/d – at a 530 Ml/d deficit – over the past few months was unsustainable and would lead to water supply interruptions. “The current combination of extremely high temperatures and virtually no rainfall within our area of supply has resulted in high water consumption levels, which is placing a significant amount of stress on our system,” Rand Water said in a statement. The Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS) reports that some of the country’s water reservoirs are losing 1% of stored water week-on-week. The levels have dropped from 73.3% in the same period last year to 60% this week, a 10% loss in 12 months. “Rand Water is working hard to manage the water demand requirements of our municipal and industrial customers in Gauteng, North West, Free State and Mpumalanga provinces,” it added. The water authority reiterated calls for consumers to play their part by using water sparingly and protecting this vital commodity. Rand Water’s warning came as the DWS urged water users in Mpumalanga to use water wisely as dam levels drop. A weekly dam levels report shows that Mpumalanga’s water storage continued to decline week on week, dropping to 58.9% this week from 60% last week. This was also a significant decline on the 71.4% measured in the same period last year. “The heat wave that is experienced in most parts of the province has contributed to this decline owing to evaporation and the lack of rains is not helping the situation either,” the department noted. Hot temperatures are expected to persist until the end of the summer period, while below-average rainfall is expected between October and mid-December 2019, thereby raising evaporation levels in the dams. This, in addition to the “alarming” decline in dam levels in certain areas across South Africa has prompted Human Settlement, Water and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu to implement a number of urgent measures to address the water challenges in identified areas. The interventions include completing the construction of water projects, the refurbishment of dysfunctional boreholes in drought-stricken areas, assigning a team of specialists for rapid intervention in identified areas and addressing dysfunctional water works. The department plans to drill and equip boreholes in drought-stricken Graaf-Reinet and bring Xonxa Dam in Queenstown online, while the local water treatment works in Lusikisiki is set to be upgraded and the construction of Zalu dam prioritised. Further, funds have been sourced through the Regional Bulk Infrastructure Grant to facilitate the bulk supply of water and equipment of boreholes in Qwaqwa, Free State. “The area is facing water challenges after the dam level at Fika Patso has plummeted to 10%. Currently, local communities rely on water from boreholes while additional water supply projects are being constructed,” she said in a statement. Other areas that are affected by water scarcity and that have been identified for intervention are Butterworth, Lusikisiki, Port Alfred and Alfred Nzo in the Eastern Cape; as well as Aggeneys in the Namakwa District in Northern Cape. In Limpopo, the areas include Tzaneen, Mogalakwena in Capricorn, Modimolle, Bela Bela, Thabazimbi and Polokwane. “The department confirms that water supply in Gauteng remains secured as the Integrated Vaal River System is fed by 14 rivers and contingency plans for the stabilizing of the system are in place.