Specialist industrial plugs and sockets manufacturer Ampco on Thursday launched its new plastic plug and connector range for use in commercial, mining and industrial applications. This advanced Gen 2 plastic range further expands the company’s current locally manufactured metal and plastic range of plugs and connectors, said sister company Powermite director Donovan Marks. The compact and robust Ampco Gen 2 plastic range is made from Polyamide 6 and acrylonitrile butadiene styrene or polycarbonate plastic. Marks noted that these virgin-grade plastic materials put the Gen 2 range in a league of its own and provided a host of enhanced benefits, including impact resistance; robustness; high thermal stability (self-extinguishing); great insulating qualities; high disruptive strength; ultraviolet resistance; and high abrasion and weather resistance. The plug and socket ranges are internationally standardised by the International Electrotechnical Commission, the global organisation for standardisation of electrical equipment. With a focus on extending product lifespan, the material also delivers excellent resistance to an array of chemicals and is free from cadmium and halogen. The IP44- and IP67-rated Gen 2 range is suited to arduous applications where portable electrical equipment is used such as electric motor driven and heating machinery, welding, emergency generator supplies, information technology installations, quarrying, mining, water purification, as well as portable site and stage lighting. The range is offered in screwless quick connect and standard screw terminal connecting and includes industrial plugs and sockets 16 A – 125 A, connectors, plastic cable extension reels (XREEL), heavy-duty engineering plastic site distribution boxes with socket outlets, heavy-duty rubber distribution combination boxes, couplers, wall and flanged sockets 16 A to 125 A, switched interlocked sockets as well as the PRCD-S+ inline portable protection device. Breaking the cable reel barrier, Ampco’s high impact resistance XREEL is packed with superior-quality components and features an ergonomic handle, a thermal circuit breaker, a brake mechanism with central spindle, drum openings for water drainage, a stable crank and two parking positions for the plug. The Ampco Gen 2 heavy-duty engineering plastic and rubber site distribution boxes with socket outlets can be customised and function well in gruelling working conditions such as petrochemical plants, dockyards and heavy engineering conditions. The advanced PRCD-S+ (earth leakage) 30 mA @ 230 V is a portable inline mobile personal protection device to prevent electrical injury especially in construction sites. “With operators regularly connecting electrical equipment, the risk of accidents are high. Thanks to its ability to recognise measurement errors, under- and over-voltage, conductor interruptions and wiring errors from the source system, the PRCD-S+ will not switch on, safeguarding operators against incorrect electrical installations. “This easy-to-use, handheld protection device features a light emitting diode signal unit which senses error situations, displays a permanent status indication, and disconnects the supply,” explained Marks. Complementing the new Gen 2 plastic range is Ampco’s market leading metal and existing plastic range. Complying with the highest European quality standards, the range consists of plugs, socket outlets and isolators, with and without earth leakage protection. The metal single phase socket outlets are perfectly suited to ports and harbours as well as for applications in high humidity areas. “We are confident that these advanced products will play a key role in customers achieving their productivity and profitability goals,” said Marks.