Rail components manufacturer Alstom Ubunye on Thursday inaugurated its 80 000 m2 modernised rail components factory, in Nigel, Gauteng. The factory was established in 1957 and Alstom acquired a 51% stake in the company, Commuter Transport and Locomotive Engineering, in 2016 calling the new company "Alstom Ubunye". Alstom Southern Africa MD and Alstom Ubunye CEO Xavier Boisgontier told Engineering News Online during a factory tour that the company modernised the facility to cater for a contract it has with the Gibela Rail Transport Consortium for the supply of components for 150 trains. Gibela, in turn, has a contract with the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (PRASA) for the supply of 600 modern commuter passenger trains for South Africa’s passenger rail network over ten years, to replace the ageing Metrorail fleet. Gibela was established as a consortium between French multinational rolling stock manufacturer Alstom, Ubumbano Rail and New Africa Rail and has a factory spanning 78 ha, in Dunnottar, Gauteng. Alstom owns 61% of Gibela. The Alstom Ubunye site employs 565 people, of which 141 are women, while the Gibela Dunnottar site employs 900 people. The Gibela plant has a peak manufacturing capacity of 62 trains a year. To date, Gibela has delivered six locally built trains to PRASA. These X’trapolis MEGA trains comprise six coaches each and can accommodate up to 1 200 passengers, travelling at a speed of 120 km/h. Boisgontier explained that the Alstom Ubunye factory was ramping up to nominal mode, which includes supplying Gibela with 62 end under frames, 62 bogies, 20 traction cases, static converters, high-voltage boxes, looming, electrical cubicles and passenger information systems every month. Through the modernisation of Alstom Ubunye, Alstom has established an African rail company with local partners, creating a stronger industrial and commercial base with the purpose of offering a complete transport portfolio to address Southern Africa’s railway transport needs.