From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Specialty chemicals company Clariant has launched a new centre of excellence in Johannesburg, in South Africa, with this aimed at supporting the growing African mining industry. Tasneem Bulbulia tells us more. Tasneem Bulbulia: Clariant sub-Saharan Africa head Dries Lategan indicated that the new centre would enable Clariant to provide tailored chemical filtration and separation solutions for mining companies in the region. The facility will serve as a regional hub for mining operators in Africa, serving mines in South Africa, sub-Saharan Africa, the rest of Africa and even beyond the continent, if needed. Lategan explains the rationale behind opening the centre, as well as the benefits it will engender. Clariant sub-Saharan Africa head Dries Lategan: Tasneem Bulbulia: Lategan outlines the new centre of excellence Clariant sub-Saharan Africa head Dries Lategan: Tasneem Bulbulia: Notably, the centre ties into Clariant’s commitment to sustainability, and products will bear the company’s EcoTain label, which indicates that products have undergone a systematic, in-depth screening process using 36 criteria in all three sustainability dimensions of social, environmental and economic. Lategan elaborates Clariant sub-Saharan Africa head Dries Lategan: Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines PPC warns against the threat of substandard cement products Large-scale dismissals continue to rise in labour market on the back of legislative reform and fourth industrial reveolution Substandard cement products are threatening the built environment industry and placing South African lives at risk, says PPC. PPC South Africa MD Njombo Lekula; The Council for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration revealed that the commission had observed increased referrals of large-scale dismissals in the 2018/19 financial year. CCMA director Cameron Morajane: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.