Mahindra South Africa (SA) appears on track to deliver another new yearly sales record. Looking at sales for the first three quarters of 2019, the group had almost reached its  full year sales volume for 2018 by September this year. This achievement is particularly significant given the decline in the South African new-vehicle market, which is down 3.5% for the nine months to end-September. In contrast, Mahindra SA sales have grown by 30%, to reach 5 584-unit sales for the year to end-September. The company’s parts division grew in line with new-vehicle sales, with sales up 27% over the same period. “We are humbled by the support we have received from the growing number of Mahindra fans and customers, and also from our dealer network and staff,” notes Mahindra CEO Rajesh Gupta. "We believe that our mix of desirable sports-utility vehicles (SUVs) and pick-ups, which offers fantastic value for money, our growing network of dealers and our history of solid customer service for the last decade-and-a-half have given us the platform from which we can grow in this tough market.” Gupta adds that the average sales per dealer have increased by 24% in the last six months. This year’s sales success follows an aggressive marketing and expansion phase, which started in May 2018 with the official opening of the assembly facility for the Mahindra Pik Up range in Durban, KwaZulu-Natal. This facility assembles the entire Pik Up range for South Africa and neighbouring countries. Since then, Mahindra has also refreshed two of its most popular models, the entry-level KUV100 NXT and the large XUV500. Since its launch, the KUV100 NXT has become the fastest growing sub-compact crossover in its class, thanks in part to the introduction of an entry-level K2+ variant that offers two airbags and ABS brakes at R142 999. In 2019, Mahindra launched the XUV300 compact SUV, which has quickly grown to become a top-seller for the brand. The Pik Up has recorded similar success this year and is now the fastest growing bakkie in terms of sales in the country. Gupta noted in January that Mahindra SA aimed to sell more than 7 500 units this year. This would be a significant jump from last year’s new record of more than 5 500 units, which was a 26% increase on 2017 sales. “We aim for more than 10 000 units by 2022,” he noted.