From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Bulk handling vehicles original-equipment manufacturer Desmond Equipment South Africa, also referred to as Dezzi Equipment, is aiming to capitalise on and boost years of consistent growth in the South African market by expanding its product range through partnerships. Cameron Mackay tells us more. Cameron Mackay: Dezzi Equipment designs and manufactures a range of wheel loaders, articulated dump trucks, motor graders, hauler tractors, cane loaders and three-wheel loggers. With 25 years of manufacturing experience and 45 years in existence as of next year, Dezzi Equipment MD Carl Gutzeit states that the expansion of its product range will showcase a more well-rounded product offering appropriate for African conditions. Dezzi MD Carl Gutzeit: Cameron Mackay: In addition to developing a 40 t articulated dump truck for African conditions, Dezzi will distribute additional materials handling vehicles through two global manufacturers. This includes Turkish earth-moving manufacturer Cukurova Machine Industry (CMI) and a Japanese earth moving equipment manufacturer. The agreement with CMI would include 15 t, 20 t, and 25 t wheel loaders, as Dezzi has had success in offering CMI’s tractor loader backhoes since 2017. Gutzeit states that dual branding these products will contribute to the company’s growth and further extension of the company’s brand. Dezzi MD Carl Gutzeit: Cameron Mackay: The company’s extensive dealer network has 19 dealers in South Arica, and 23 dealers throughout sub-Saharan Africa. Gutzeit claims that this access to strategic regions will offer a more efficient service to clients. The company also plans to open another branch in George in the Western Cape, which will be fully functional to offer sales and after-sales service by November this year Dezzi MD Carl Gutzeit:  Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines John Deere invites third-party providers to join its digital platform Agricultural equipment supplier John Deere sub-Saharan Africa hosted a technology day, inviting 18 solutions providers to learn more about the company’s Operations Centre platform. John Deere's Wayne Spaumer: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.