Gauteng Premier David Makhura on Friday announced changes to his executive council, replacing Dr Kgosientso Ramokgopa who was MEC for Economic Development, Agriculture and Environment with Morakane Mosupyoe. "Following consultation within the ANC [African National Congress] structures and the alliance structures broadly, I have decided to make changes in the composition of the executive council," said Makhura. "It is common cause that the National Executive Committee (NEC) of the governing party took a decision that where a premier is male in a province that it governs, 60 percent of the executive council must be female. "I have taken some time to effect  this decision of the governing party to allow all the members of the executive council to finalise their plans in line with the commitments I announced during the state of the province address in July. "Members of the executive council have since then engaged in extensive consultation with various stakeholders around finalising our plan - Growing Gauteng Together."
 
Before her appointment as MEC, Mosupyoe was chairperson of the social development portfolio committee in the Gauteng provincial legislature. "Ms Mosupyoe served as a Councillor in the City of Tshwane from 2006 to 2016. During this period, she also served as the MMC for health and social development," said Makhura. "She also formed part of the social and economic cluster over the same period. In 2011 she became the first female speaker of the City of Tshwane until 2016 when the term ended."  
 
Mosupyoe is a member of the provincial executive committee and also serves on the provincial working committee of the ANC in Gauteng.
 
"I wish to thank Dr. Kgosientso Ramokgopa the outgoing MEC for the sterling work he has done over the past four months," said the Gauteng premier. "Dr. Ramokgopa has done a great job towards unlocking investment and economic opportunities in all five corridors of our province. I wish Dr Ramokgopa well in his new role, which will be announced soon."
 
Makhura said he was confident Mosupyoe will build on the "solid foundation" laid by Ramokgopa towards the realisation of Gauteng's vision of growing the provincial economy.