In the vein of stabilising the country’s debt outlook and improving the composition of spending, one of the measures identified will be combatting the wage bill and reducing its growth, Finance Minister Tito Mboweni indicated, delivering his Medium term budget policy statement (MTBS) speech in Parliament on Wednesday. The country’s debt this year exceeded R3-trillion, and is expected to rise to R4.5-trillion in the next three years, he noted. “As things stand, without any policy adjustments, debt will most likely exceed 70% of GDP by 2022/23. This is a serious position to be in,” Mboweni said. Moreover, South Africa’s spending pressures are growing, which is led by public sector service wage bill, along with State-owned companies. According to the MTBS 2019 Policy Statement, narrowing the deficit and improving the composition of spending requires reductions in the growth of the wage bill, which accounts for 35% of the consolidated budget. A detailed analysis of spending on public-sector wages has indicated that 29 000 public servants, plus members of the national executive, members of Parliament, members of the provincial executive, and so forth, each earned more than R1-million last year. After adjusting for inflation, this is more than double the number of civil servants earning more than R1-million in 2006/7. The average wage increase across government was 6.8% in 2018/19, or 2.2 % above inflation. After adjusting for inflation, the average government wage has risen by 66% in the last ten years. Analysis indicates that growth in the public service wage bill needs to decline to reduce the pressure on goods and services, and infrastructure. The wage bill accounts 46% of tax revenue in 2019/20, mainly owing to the above-inflation increase in average remuneration over the past decade, as alluded to earlier. The Policy Statement indicates that salaries for civil servants have grown by about 40% in real terms over the past decade. It highlighted that between 2006/07 and 2018/19 – a period that includes the introduction of occupation-specific dispensations for wages – total compensation spending on the main budget more than tripled, from R154-billion to R518-billion. Moreover, after adjusting for inflation, average remuneration in the public service rose 66% between 2006/07 and 2018/19. Much of this increase was concentrated in 2009/10 and 2010/11, where the fastest rise in wages was recorded in high-skill professions, including medical doctors, teachers and lawyers, where occupation-specific dispensations were introduced. MEASURES
Mboweni indicated that Treasury will undertake discussions in the relevant bargaining structures and with other stakeholders to achieve a sustainable arrangement with regard to the wage bill. Moreover, he called on State-owned companies, public entities and the private sector for board and executive management compensation and benefits to be reduced. To tackle the inflated wage bill, President Cyril Ramaphosa has agreed to several guidelines which will apply to members of the Cabinet and members of provincial executives. This entails, firstly, that for the foreseeable future, Cabinet, Premiers and MECs’ salaries will be frozen at current levels, with the likelihood of an adjustment downwards. Secondly, the cost of official cars will be capped at R700 000 VAT inclusive. Thirdly, a new cell phone dispensation will cap the amount claimable from the state. In a media briefing preceding his speech, Mboweni indicated that public sector spend on cell phones in the last 12 months amounted to about R5-billion. Fourthly, all domestic travel will be on economy class tickets. In his media briefing, Mboweni highlighted first and business class travel as a huge wastage of funds. Lastly, there will no longer be payment for subsistence and travel for both domestic and international trips. “For every R100 received in taxation, R46 goes to employees in the sector, which is drastically high. We need to have a conversation with the public sector on how, in these difficult circumstances, we can moderate the wage bill,” Mboweni said in his briefing. He clarified that this will not mean reducing the number of employees in the sector, but rather, moderating the level of wage. In his briefing, Mboweni noted that there is time before February’s budget for serious conversation around negotiation wages and dealing with the high bill. He also mentioned that he has had discussions with DG Dondo regrading selling some assets, with the specifics not disclosable at present. In his speech, Mboweni called on leadership in Parliament to see how they can further contain compensation and benefits. According to the Policy Statement, options to be considered in reducing the wage bill include pegging cost-of-living adjustments at or below CPI inflation, halting automatic pay progression and reviewing occupation-specific dispensations for wages. Government will discuss these matters with labour, and progress will be announced in the 2020 Budget. The policy statement notes that in 2020/21, negotiations will begin for a new public-service wage agreement. Another agreement that is above consumer price index inflation, as occurred in the previous three rounds of wage negotiations, would put additional pressure on the public finances. It would continue the trend of compensation crowding out other areas of spending, widen the structural deficit and limit government’s ability to respond to any new fiscal pressures and risks, the statement indicates. Mboweni also cited measures from the 2019 Budget, which included early retirement without penalisation; the national macro reorganisation of government; reducing performance bonuses; and freezing of salaries for members of the executive and parliamentarians; but he commiserated that have not realised as much savings as hoped. Moreover, he noted that early retirement savings are coming through slower than originally anticipated; and, in this vein, the early retirement programme will be reinvigorated.